ENNUI,

OR

MEMOIRS

o T THE

EARL OF GLENTHORN.

Que faites-vous à Potzdam ? demandois-je un jour au prince
Guillaume. Monsieur, me repondit-il, nous passons
ft notre vie à conjuguer tous le même verbe ; Je m'ennuie,
4‘ tu t'ennuies, il s'ennuie, nous nous ennuyons, vous vous en-
V nuyez, ils s'ennuient ; je m ennuyois,je m ennuierai," etc.

Thiebauld, Mem. de Frederick le Grand.

CHAPTER I.

Bred up in luxurious indolence, I was
surrounded by friends, who seemed to have
no business in this world but to save me the
trouble of thinking or acting for myself;
and I was confirmed in the pride of help-lessness by being continually reminded,
that I was the only son and heir of the Earl
of Glenthorn. My mother died a few weeks
after I was born, and I lost my father when
I was very young. I was left to the care of

a guardian, who in hopes of winning my
affections never controlled my wishes, or even
my whims; I changed schools and masters
as often as I pleased, and consequently
learned nothing : at last I found a private
tutor, who suited me exactly, for he was
completely of my own opinion, “ that every
thing, which the young Earl of Glenthorn
did not know by the instinct of genius, was
not worth his learning.” Money could
purchase a reputation for talents, and with
money I was immoderately supplied $ for
my guardian expected to bribe me with a
part of my own fortune, to forbear inquiring
what had become of a certain deficiency in
the remainder. This tacit compact I per-
fectly understood ; we were consequently
on the most amicable terms imaginable,
and the most confidential, for I thought It
better to deal with my guardian than with
jews. Thus at an age when other young
men are subject to some restraint, either
from the necessity of their circumstances,
or the discretion of their friends, I became
completely master of myself, and of my for-
tune. My companions envied me; but
even their envy was not sufficient to make

me happy. Whilst yet a boy I began to
feel the dreadful symptoms of that mental
malady, which baffles the skill of medicine,
and for which wealth can purchase only
temporary alleviation. For this complaint
there is no precise English name,—but,
alas ! the foreign term is now naturalized
in England.—Among the higher classes,
whether in the wealthy or the fashionable
world, who is unacquainted with ennui V—
At first I was unconscious of being subject
to this disease; I felt that something was
the matter with me, but I did not know
what: yet the symptoms were sufficiently
marked. I was afflicted with frequent fits
of fidgetting, yawning, and stretching, with
a constant restlessness of mind and body, an
aversion to the place I was in, or the thing
I was doing, or rather to that which was
passing before my eyes, for I was never
doing any thing; I had an utter abhor-
rence, and an incapacity of voluntary exer-
tion. Unless roused by external stimulus, I
sunk into that kind of apathy, and vacancy
of ideas, vulgarly known by the name of a
brozvn study. If confined in a room for
more than half an hour by bad weather, or

other contrarieties, I would pace backwards
and forwards, like the restless cavia in his
den, with a fretful, unmeaning pertinacity.
I felt an insatiable longing for something
new, and a childish love of locomotion.

My physician and my guardian, not
knowing what else to do with me, sent me
abroad. I set out upon my travels in my
eighteenth year, attended by my favourite
tutor as my companion. We perfectly agreed
in our ideas of travelling ; we hurried from
place to place as fast as horses and wheels,
and curses and guineas, could carry us.
Milord Anglois rattled over half the globe
without getting one inch farther from his
ennui. Three years were to be consumed
before I should be of age. What sums did
I spend during this interval in expedition-
money to Time! but the more I tried to
hasten him, the slower the rogue went. I
lost my money and my temper.

At last the day for which I had so long
panted arrived. I was twenty-one ! and I
took possession of my estate. The bells
rang, the bonfires blazed, the tables were
spread, the wine flowed, huzzas resounded,
friends and tenants crowded about me, and

nothing but the voice of joy and congratu-
lation was to be heard. The bustle of my
situation kept me awake for some weeks 3
the pleasure of property was new, and, as
long as the novelty lasted, delightful. I
cannot say that I was satisfied, but my
mind was distended by the sense of the
magnitude of my possessions. I had large
estates in England; and in one of the re-
mote maritime counties of Ireland, I was
lord over an immense territory, annexed
to the ancient castle of Glenthorn. A noble
pile of antiquity ! worth ten degenerate
castles of modern days. It was placed in
a bold romantic situation ; at least as far
as I could judge of it by a picture, said to
be a striking likeness, which hung in my hall
at Sherwood Park in England. I was born
in Ireland, and nursed, as I was told, in
an Irish cabin; for my father had an idea,
that this would make me hardy : he left me
with my Irish nurse till I was two years
old, and from that time forward neither he
nor I ever revisited Ireland. He had a dis-
like to that country, and I grew up in his
prejudices. I declared that I would always
reside in England. Sherwood Park, my

English country seat, had but one fault. It
was completely finished. The house was
magnificent, and in the modem taste ; the
furniture fashionably elegant, and in all the
gloss of novelty. Not a single luxury
omitted; not a fault could be found by
the most fastidious critic. My park, my
grounds, displayed all the beauties of na-
ture and of art, judiciously combined. Ma-
jestic woods, waving their dark foliage, over-
hung------But I will spare my readers the

description, for I remember falling asleep
myself whilst a poet was reading to me an
ode on the beauties of Sherwood Park.
These beauties too soon became familiar to
my eye; and even the idea of being the
proprietor of this enchanting place soon
palled upon my vanity. Every casual vi-
sitor, all the strangers, even the common
people, who were allowed once a week to
walk in my demesne, enjoyed it a thousand
times more than I could. I remember, that,
about six weeks after I came to Sherwood
Park, I one evening escaped from the crowds
of friends who tilled my house, to indulge
myself in a solitary, melancholy walk. I
saw at some distance a party of people,

who were coming to admire the grounds,
and to avoid meeting them I took shelter
under a fine tree, the branches of which,
hanging to the ground, concealed me from
the view of passengers. Thus seated, I
was checked in the middle of a desperate*
yawn, by hearing one among the party of
strangers exclaiming—

How happy the owner of this place must
be ! Has he any want, or any care?

Yes: had I known how to enjoy the goods
of life, I might have been happy j but want*
of occupation, and antipathy to exertion,
rendered me one of the most miserable men
upon earth. Still I imagined, that the cause
of my discontent proceeded from some ex-
ternal circumstance. Soon after my coming
of age, business of various sorts required
my attention ; papers were to be signed,
and lands were to be let: these things ap-
peared to me terrible difficulties. Not even
that minister of state, who so feelingly de-
scribes his horrour at the first appearance
of the secretary with the great portfolio, ever
experienced sensations so oppressive as
mine were, when my steward began to talk
to me of my own affairs. In the peevish-

ness of my indolence, I declared, that I
thought the pains overbalanced the plea-
sures of property. Captain Crawley, a
friend—a sort of a friend—an humble
companion of mine, a gross, unblushing,
thorough-going flatterer, happened to be
present when I made this declaration : he
kindly undertook to stand between me and
the shadow of trouble. I accepted this
offer.

Aye, Crawley, said I, do see and settle
with these people.

I had not the slightest confidence in the
person into whose hands, to save myself
from the labour of thinking, I thus threw'
all my affairs ; but I satisfied my under-
standing, by resolving that, when I should
have leisure, I would look out for an agent,
upon whom I could depend.

I had now been nearly two months at
Sherwood Park ; too long a time, I thought,
to remain in any place, and I was impatient
to get away. My steward, w ho disliked
the idea of my spending my summers at
home, found it easy to persuade me, that
the water on my estate had a brackish un-
wholesome taste. The man who told me

this stood before me in perfect health, though
he had drunk this insalubrious water all his
life ; but it was too laborious a task for my
intellects to compare the evidence of my
different senses, and I found it most easy to
believe what I heard, though it was in direct
opposition to what I saw. Away I hurried
to a watering-place, after the example of
many of my noble contemporaries,, who
leave their delightful country seats to pay,
by the inch, for being squeezed up in lodg-
ing houses, with all imaginable inconveni-
ence, during the hottest months in summer.
I whiled away my time at Brighton, cursing
the heat of the weather, till the winter came,
and then cursing the cold, and longing for
the London winter.

The London winter commenced, and the
young Earl of Glenthorn, and his entertain-
ments, and his equipages, and his extrava-
gance, were the conversation of all the
world, and the joy of the newspapers. The
immense cost of the fruit at my deserts
was recorded; the annual expense of the
vast nosegays of hot-house flowers worn
daily by the footmen who clung behind
my coach, was calculated ; the hundreds of

wax lights, which burned nightly in my
house, were numbered by the idle admirers
of folly ; and it was known by the ser-
vants of every genteel family in town, that
Lord Glenthorn suffered nothing but wax
to be burned in his stables ; that his ser-
vants drank nothing but claret and cham-
pagne; that his liveries, surpassing the
imagination of ambassadors, vied with regal
magnificence, whilst their golden trappings
could have stood even the test of Chinese
curiosity. My coachmaker’s bill for this
year, if laid before the public, would amuse
and astonish sober-minded people, as much
as some charges which have lately ap-
peared in our courts of justice for extra-
ordinary coaches and very extraordinary
landaus. I will not enter into the detail
of my extravagance in minor articles of
expense; these, I thought, could never be
felt by such a fortune as that of the Earl
of Glenthorn : but, for the information of
those who have the same course to run or
to avoid, I should observe, that my di-
urnal visits to jewellers* shops amounted, in
time, to sums worth mentioning. Of the
multitude of baubles that I bought, the

rings, the seals, the chains, I will give no
. account ; it would pass the belief of man,
and the imagination of woman. Those who
have the least value for their time have
usually the greatest number of watches,
and are the, most anxious about the exact-
ness of their going. I and my repeaters
were my own plagues, and the profit of all
the fashionable watchmakers, whose shops
I regularly .visited for a lounge. My his-
tory, at this period, would be a complete
lounger’s journal ; but I will spare my read-
ers this diary. I wish, however, as I have
had ample experience, to impress it on the
minds of all whom it may concern, that
a lounger of fortune must be extravagant.
I went into shops merely to pass an idle
hour, but I could not help buying some-
thing ; and I was ever at the mercy of
tradesmen, who took advantage of my in-
dolence, and who thought my fortune in-
exhaustible. I really had not any taste for
expense ; but I let all w ho dealt with me,
especially my servants, do as they pleased,
rather than be at the trouble of making them
do as they ought. They assured me, that
Lord Glenthorn must have such and such

things, and must do so and so, and I quietly
submitted to this imaginary necessity.

All this time I was the envy of my ac-
quaintance, but I was more deserving of
their compassion. Without anxiety or ex-
ertion, I possessed every tiling they wanted ;
but then I had no motive—I had nothing
to desire ; I had an immense fortune, and I
was the Earl of Glenthorn : my title and
wealth were sufficient distinctions; how
could I be anxious about my boots, or the
cape of my coat, or any of those trifles
which so happily interest and occupy the
lives of fashionable young men, who have
not the misfortune to possess a large estate ?
Most of my companions had some real or
imaginary grievance, some old uncle or
father, some cursed profession to complain
of, but I had none. They had hopes and
fears, but I had none. I was on the pinnacle
of glory, which they were endeavouring to
reach, and I had nothing to do but to sit
still, and enjoy the barrenness of the
prospect.

In this recital I have communicated, I
hope, to my readers, some portion of that
ennui which I endured, otherwise they can-

not form an adequate idea of my temptation
to become a gambler. I really had no vice,
nor any of those propensities which lead to
vice; but ennui produced most of the ef-
fects that are usually attributed to strong
passions or a vicious disposition.

CHAPTER II.

“ O ! ressource assurée,

“ Viens ranimer leur langueur désœuvrée ;

“ Leur aine vide est du moins amusée
“ Par l’avarice en plaisir déguisée.”

Gaming relieved me from that insuperable
listlessness by which I was oppressed. I
became interested—I became agitated ; in
short, I found a new kind of stimulus, and
I indulged in it most in temperately. I grew
immoderately fond of that which supplied
me with sensations. My days and nights
were passed at the gaming table. I re-
member once spending three days and
three nights in the hazard room of a well-
known house in St. James’s-street : the
shutters were closed, the curtains down,
and we had candles the whole time ; even
in the adjoining rooms we had candles,
that when our doors were opened to
bring in refreshments, no obtrusive gleam
of day-light might remind us how the
hours had passed. How human nature

supported the fatigue I know not. We
scarcely allowed ourselves a moment's
pause to take the sustenance our bodies
required. At last one of the waiters, who
had been in the room with us the whole
time, declared that he could hold out no
longer, and that sleep he must. With diffi-
culty he obtained an hour’s truce : the mo-
ment he got out of the room he fell asleep,
absolutely at the very threshold of our door.
By the rules of the house he was entitled to
a bonus on every transfer of property at
the hazard table, and he had made, in the
course of these three days, upwards of
three hundred pounds. Sleep and avarice
had struggled to the utmost, but, with his
vulgar habits, sleep prevailed. We were
wide awake. I never shall forget the figure
of one of my noble associates, who sat
holding his watch, his eager eyes fixed up-
on the minute hand, whilst he exclaimed
continually,  “This hour will never be
over.” Then he listened to discover whether
his watch had stopped; then cursed the
lazy fellow for falling asleep, protesting
that, for his part, he never would again
consent to such waste of time. The very

instant the hour was ended, he ordered
i( that dog” to be awakened, and to work
we went. At this sitting 35000/. were lost
and won. I was very fortunate, for I lost
a mere trifle—ten thousand pounds; but I
could not expect to be always so lucky.

-----Now we come to the old story of being

ruined by play. My English John-o’-the-
Scales warned me, that he could advance
no more money; my Irish agent, upon
whom my draughts had indeed been un-
merciful, could not oblige me any longer,
and he threw up his agency, after having
made his fortune at my expense. I railed,
but railing would not pay my debts of ho-
nour, I inveighed against my grandfather
for having tied me up so tight; I could
neither mortgage nor sell : my Irish estate
would have been sold instantly, had it not
been settled upon a Mr. Delamere. The
pleasure of abusing him, whom I had ne-
ver seen, and of whom I knew nothing,
but that he was to be my heir, relieved
me wonderfully. He died, and left only
a daughter, a mere child. My chance of
possessing the estate in fee-simple increased :
I sold this increased value to the Jews, and

gamed on.—Miss Delamere, some time af-
terwards, had the small-pox. Upon the
event of her illness I laid bets to an a-
mazing amount.

She recovered. No more money could be
raised, and my debts were to be paid. In
this dilemma I recollected, that I once had
a guardian, and that I had never settled
accounts with him. Crawley, who conti-
nued to be my factotum, and flatterer in
ordinary and extraordinary, informed me,
upon looking over these accounts, that
there was a mine of money due to me, if I
could but obtain it by law or equity. To
law I went, and the anxiety of a law-suit
might have, in some degree, supplied the
place of gambling; but all my business
was managed for me by Crawley, and I
charged him never to mention the subject
to me till a verdict should be obtained.

A verdict was obtained against me. It
was proved in open court by my own wit-
nesses, that I was a fool; but as no judge,
jury, or chancellor could believe, that I was
so great a fool as my carelessness indicated,
my guardian stood acquitted in equity of
being so great a rogue as he really was.

What was now to be done? I saw my
doom. As a highwayman knows, that he
must come to the gallows at last, and
acts accordingly, so a fashionably extra-
vagant youth knows, that sooner or later
be must come to matrimony. No one
could have more horrour of this catas-
trophe than I felt; but it was in vain
to oppose my destiny. My opinion of
women had been formed from the com-
mon-place jests of my companions, and
from my own acquaintance with the worst
part of the sex. I had never felt the pas-
sion of love, and of course believed it to
be something that might have existed in
former ages, but that was in our days quite
obsolete, at least among the knowing part
of the world, in my imagination, young
women were divided into two classes, those
who were to be purchased, and those who
were to purchase. Between these two
classes, though the division was to be mark-
ed externally by a certain degree of cere-
mony, yet L was internally persuaded, that
there was no essential difference. In my
feelings towards them there was some dis-
tinction ; of the first class I was tired, and

of the second I was afraid.—Afraid ! Yes—
afraid of being taken in. With these fears,
and these sentiments, I was now to choose
a wife. I chose her by the numeration
table :	Units,	tens,	hundreds,	thousands;

tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands.
I was content, in the language of the news-
papers, to lead to the hymeneal altar any
fashionable fair one, whose fortune came
under this sixth place of figures. No sooner
were my dispositions known, than the friends
of a young heiress, who wanted to purchase
a coronet, settled a match between us. My
bride had one hundred wedding dresses,
elegant as a select committee of mantua-
makers and milliners, French and English,
could devise. The least expensive of these
robes, as well as I remember, cost fifty
guineas; the most admired came to about
five hundred pounds, and was thought, by
the best judges in these matters, to be won-
derfully cheap, as it was of lace such as
bad never before been trailed in English
dust, even by the lady of a nabob. These
things were shown in London as a spectacle
for some days, by the mantua-maker, who
declared, that she bad lost many a night’s

rest in contriving how to make such a va-
riety of dresses sufficiently magnificent and
distinguished. The jewellers also requested
and obtained permission to exhibit the dif-
ferent sets of jewels ; these were so nume-
rous, that Lady Glenthorn scarcely knew
them all. One day, soon after her marriage,
somebody at court, observing that her dia-
monds were prodigiously fine, asked where
she bought them. “ Really,” said she,
“ I cannot tell. I have so many sets I
declare ! I don't know whether it's my Pa-
ris, or my Hamburgh, or my London set."

Poor young creature ! I believe her chief
idea of happiness in marriage was the pos-
session of the jewels and paraphernalia of a
countess—I am sure it was the only hope
she could have, that was likely to be realiz-
ed, in marrying me. I thought it manly
and fashionable to be indifferent, if not
contemptuous to my wife : I considered her
only as an incumbrance, that I was obliged
to take along with a fortune. Beside the
disagreeable ideas generally connected with
the word wife, I had some peculiar reasons
for my aversion to my Lady Glenthorn.
Before her friends would suffer me to take

possession of her fortune, they required from
me a solemn oath against gambling; so I
was compelled to abjure the hazard table
and the turf, the only two objects in life
that could keep me awake. This extorted
vow I set down entirely to my brides ac-
count, and I therefore became even more
averse from her than men usually are who
marry for money. Yet this dislike sub-
sided. Lady Glenthorn was only childish—
I, of an easy temper—I thought her ridi-
culous, but it was too much trouble to tell
her so continually. I let the occasions pass,
and even forgot her ladyship, when she
was not absolutely in my way. She was
too frivolous to be hated, and the passion
of hatred was not to be easily sustained in
my mind. The habit of ennui was stronger
than all my passions put together.

CHAPTER III.

*' Or realize what we think fabulous,
“ I’th’ bill of fare of Eliogabalus.”

AFTER my marriage, my old malady rose
to an insupportable height. The pleasures
of the table were all that seemed left to me
in life. Most of the young men of any ton,
either were, or pretended to be, connoisseurs
in the science of good eating. Their talk
was of sauces and of cooks—what dishes
each cook was famous for, whether his fort
lay in white sauces or brown, in soups, len-
tilles, fricandeaus, bechemele, matelotes,
daubes, &c. Then the history and genea-
logy of the cooks came after the discussion
of the merit of their works ; who my Lord
C—’s cook lived with formerly—what my

Lord D------ gave his cook—where they

met with these great geniuses, &c. I can-
not boast that our conversation at these se-
lect dinners, from which the ladies were
excluded, was very entertaining ; but true.

good eaters detest wit at dinner-time, and
sentiment at all times. I think I observed,
that amongst these cognoscenti there was
scarcely one to whom the delicacy of taste
did not daily prove a source of more pain
than pleasure. There was always a cruel
something that spoiled the rest; or if the
dinner were excellent, beyond the power of
the most fastidious palate to condemn, yet
there was the hazard of being placed far
from the favourite dish, or the still greater
danger of being deputed to carve at the
head or foot of the table. How I have
seen a heavy nobleman, of this set, dex-
terously manoeuvre to avoid the dangerous
honour of carving a haunch of venison.
But, good heavens, said I, when a confi-
dential whisper pointed this first to my no-
tice—why does he not like to carve?—he
would have it in his power to help himself
to his mind, which nobody else can do so

well-----No ! if he carves he must give the

vice bits to others, every body here under-
stands them as well as he—each knows
what is upon his neighbour’s plate, and
what ought to be there, and what must be
in the dish. I found that it was an affair

of calculation—a game at which nobody
can cheat without being discovered and
disgraced—I emulated, and soon equalled
my experienced friends. I became a per-
fect epicure, and gloried in the character,
for it could be supported without any in-
tellectual exertion, and it was fashionable.

I cannot say that I could ever eat as much
as some of my companions—One of them
I once heard to exclaim, after a monstrous
dinner, “ I wish my digestion was equal to
my appetite.,, I would not be thought to
exaggerate, therefore I shall not recount
the wonders I have seen performed by these
capacious heroes of the table. After what
I have beheld, to say nothing of what I have
achieved, I can believe any thing that is
related of the capacity of the human sto-
mach. I can credit even the account of the
dinner which Madame de Bavière affirms
she saw eaten by Lewis the Fourteenth,
viz. “ quatre assiettes de différentes soupes ;
un faisan tout entier; un perdrix; une
grande assiette pleine de salade ; du mou-
ton coupé dans son jus avec de l’ail ; deux *
bons morceaux de jambon ; une assiette
pleine de pâtisserie ; du fruit et des confi-

tares !” Nor can I doubt the accuracy of the
historian, who assures us, that a Roman Em-
peror*, one of the most moderate of those
Imperial gluttons, took for his breakfast,
500 figs, I00 peaches, I0 melons, I00 bec-
caficoes, and 400 oysters.

Epicurism was scarcely more prevalent
during the decline of the Roman Empire,
than it is at this day amongst some of the
wealthy and noble youths of Britain. Not
one of my select dinner party but would
have been worthy of a place at the turbot
consultation, immortalized by the Roman sa-
tirist. A friend of mine, a bishop, one day
went into his kitchen, to look at a large tur-
bot, which the cook was dressing. The cook
had found it so large, that lie had cutoff the
fins—<( What a shame!” cried the bishop;
and immediately calling for the cook’s apron
he spread it before his cassock, and actually
sewed the fins again to the turbot with his
own episcopal hands. If I might judge from
my own experience, I should attribute fa-
shionable epicurism in a great measure to en-
nui. Many affect it, because they have no-

% Clocfus Albinus.

thing else to do; and sensual indulgences are
all that exist for those who have not sufficient
energy to enjoy intellectual pleasures. I
dare say, that if Heliogabalus could be
brought in evidence in his own case, and
could be made to understand the meaning of
the word ennui, he would agree with me
in opinion, that it was the cause of half his
vices. His offered reward for the discovery
of a new pleasure is stronger evidence than
any confession he could make. I thank
God that I was not born an Emperor, or I
might have become a monster. Though not
in the least inclined to cruelty, I might have
acquired the taste for it, merely for desire of
the emotion which real tragedies excite.
Fortunately, I was only an Earl and an epi-
cure. My indulgence in the excesses of the
table injured my health ; violent bodily ex-
ercise was necessary to counteract the effects
of intemperance. It was my maxim, that
a man could never eat or drink too much, if
he would but. take exercise enough. I
killed fourteen horses* and survived ; but I

* I was not the nobleman who laid a wager, that he
could ride a fine horse to death in fifteen minutes. In-

grew tired of killing horses, and I continued
to eat immoderately. I was seized with a
nervous complaint, attended with extreme
melancholy. Frequently the thoughts of
putting an end to my existence occurred,
and I had many times determined upon the
means j but very small, and apparently ina-
dequate and ridiculous motives, prevented
the execution of my design. Once, I was
kept alive by a piggery, which I wanted to
see finished. Another time, I delayed de-
stroying myself, till a statue, which I had
just purchased at a vast expense, should be
put up in my Egyptian salon. By the
awkwardness of the unpacker, the statue’s
thumb was broken. This broken thumb
saved my life ; it converted ennui into anger.
Like Montaigne and his sausage, I had now
something to complain of, and I was happy.
But at last my anger subsided, the thumb
would serve me no longer as a subject of
conversation, and I relapsed into silence and
black melancholy. I was “ aweary of the

deed, I must do myself the justice to say, that I rejoiced
at this man’s losing his bet. He blew the horse in four
minutes, and killed it ; but it did not die within the time
prescribed by the bet.

sun;’* m y old thoughts recurred. At this
time I was just entering my twenty-fifth
year. Rejoicings were preparing for my
birth-day. My Lady Glenthorn had pre-
vailed upon me to spend the summer at Sher-
wood Park, because it was new to her.
She filled the house with company and
noise; but this only increased my discon-
tent. My birth-day arrived—I wished my-
self dead—and I resolved to shoot myself at
the close of the day. I put a pistol into my
pocket, and stole out towards the evening,
unobserved by my jovial companions.
Lady Glenthorn and her set were dancing,
and I was tired of these sounds of gayety.
I took the private way to the forest which
was near the house, but one of my grooms
met me with a fine horse, which an old te-
nant had just sent as a present on my birth-
day. The horse was saddled and bridled,
the groom held the stirrup, and up I got.
The fellow told me the private gate was
locked, and I turned as he pointed to go
through the grand entrance. At the out-
side of the gate sat upon the ground, hud-
dled in a great red cloak, an old woman,
who started up and sprung forwards the mo-

ment she saw me, stretching out her arms
and her cloak with one and the same mo-
tion.

“ Ogh! is it you I see?” cried she, in a
strong Irish tone.

At this sound and this sight my horse,
who was shy, backed a little. I called to
the woman to stand out of my way.

“ Heaven bless your sweet face! I’m the
nurse that suckled yees when ye was a baby
in Ireland. Many’s the day I’ve been
longing to see you,” continued she, clasping
her hands, and standing her ground in the
middle of the gateway, regardless of my
horse, which I was pressing forward.

“ Stand out of the way, for God’s sake,
my good woman, or I shall certainly ride
over you.”

“ So! so! so!” said I, patting my rest-
less horse.

cf Oh! he’s only shy, God bless him;
he’s as quite now as a lamb, and kiss one or
other of yees I must,” cried she, throwing
her arms about the horse’s neck.

The horse, unaccustomed to this mode of
salutation, suddenly plunged, and threw"

me. My head fell against the pier of the
gate. The last sound I heard was the re-
port of a pistol; but I can give no account
of what happened afterwards. I was stun-
ned by my fall, and senseless. When I
opened my eyes, I found myself stretched
on one of the cushions of my landau, and
surrounded by a crowd of people, who
seemed to be all talking at once : in the
buzz of voices I could not distinguish any
thing that was said, till I heard Captain
Crawley’s voice above the rest, saying,

“ Send for a surgeon instantly; but it’s
all over! it’s all over! Take the body the
back way to the banquetting-house; I
must run to Lady Glenthoin.”

Î perceived that they thought me dead.
I did not at this moment feel that I was
hurt. I was curious to know what they
would all do; so I closed my eyes again be-
fore any one perceived that I had opened
them. I lay motionless, and they proceeded
with me, according to Captain Crawley’s
orders to the banquetting-house. When we
arrived there, my servants laid me on one of
the Turkish sofas, and the crowd, after

having satisfied their curiosity, dropped off
one by one, till I was left with a single foot-
man and my steward.

“ I don’t believe he’s quite dead,” said
the footman, “ for his heart beats.”

“ Oh, he’s the same as dead, for he does
not stir hand or foot, and his scull, they
say, is fractured for certain; but it will all
be seen when the surgeon comes. I am sure
he will never do. Crawley will have every
thing his own way now, and I may as well
decamp.”

fC Ay, and among them,” said the foot-
man, “ I only hope I may get my wages.”
“ What a fool that Crawley made of my
lord!’* said the steward,

“ What a fool my lord made of himself,”
said the footman, “ to be ruled, and let ail
his people be ruled, by such an upstart.
With your leave, Mr. Turner, I’ll just run
to the house to say one word to James, and
be back immediately.”

No, no, you must stay, Robert, whilst
I step home to lock my places, before Craw-
ley begins to rummage.”

The footman was now left alone with me.
Scarcely had the steward been gone two mi-

mites, when I heard a low voice near me
saying, in a tone of great anxiety, “ Is lie
dead?”

I half opened my eyes to see who it was

that spoke. The voice came from the door,

which was opposite to me, and whilst the

footman turned his back, I raised my head,

and beheld the figure of the old woman, who

had been the cause of my accident. She

was upon her knees on the threshold—her
arms crossed over her breast. I never shall
forget her face, it was so expressive of de-
spair.

“ Is he dead ?” she repeated.

“ I tell you yes,” replied the footman.

“ For the love of God let me come in, if
he is here,” cried she.

“ Come in then, and stay here whilst I run
to the house *.”

The footman ran off, and my old nurse, on
seeing me, burst into an agony of grief.

* If any one should think it impossible, that a man
©fLord Glenthorn’s consequence should, at the supposed
moment of his death, be thus neglected, let them recollect
the scenes that followed the death ofTiberius—of Henry
the Fourth of France—of William Rufus, and of George
the Second.

I did not understand one word she uttered,
as she spoke in her native language 3 but
her lamentations went to my heart, for they
came from hers. She hung over me, and I
felt her tears dropping upon my forehead.
I could not refrain from whispering, “Don’t
cry—I am alive.”

“ Blessings on him !” exclaimed she, start-
ing back; she then dropped down on her
knees to thank God. Then calling me by
every fondling name that nurses use to their
children, she begged my forgiveness, and al-
ternately cursed herself, and prayed for me.

The strong affections of this poor woman
touched me more than any thing I had ever
yet felt in my life; she seemed to be the only
person upon earth, who really cared for me,
and in spite of her vulgarity, and my preju-
dice against the tone in which she spoke,
she excited in my mind emotions of tender-
ness and gratitude. “ My good woman, if
I live, I will do something for you ; tell me
what I can do,” said I. “ Live ! live! God
bless you, live; that’s all in the wide world
I want of you, my jewel; and, till you are
well, let me watch over you at nights, as I

used to do when you were a child, and I
had you in my arms all to myself, dear.”

Three or four people now ran into the room,
to get before Captain Crawley, whose voice
was heard at this instant at a distance. I
had only time to make the poor woman un-
derstand that I wished to appear to be dead;
she took the hint with surprising quickness.
Captain Crawley came up the steps, talk-
ing in the tone of a master to the steward
and people who followed.

“ What is this old hag doing here? Where
is Robert? Where is Thomas? I ordered
them to stay till I came. Mr* Turner, why
did not you stay? What! has not the coro-
ner been here yet? The coroner must see
the body, I tell you. Good God! What a
parcel of blockheads you all are ! How many
times must I tell you the same thing? No-
thing can be done till the coroner has seen
him; then we’ll talk about the funeral, Mr.
Turner—one thing at a time. Every thing
shall be done properly, Mr. Turner. Lady
Glenthorn trusts every thing to me—Lady
Glenthorn wishes that I should order every
thing.”

" To be sure—no doubt—very proper
—I don’t say against that.”

“ But,” continued Crawley, turning to-
wards the sofa upon which I lay, and seeing
Ellinor kneeling beside me, “ What keeps
this old Irish witch here still? What bu-
siness have you here pray, and who are you
or what are you?

“ Please your honour, I was his nurse
formerly, and so had a natural longing to see
him once again before I would die.”

“ And did you come all the way from
Ireland on this wise errand?”

“ Troth I did—every inch of the way
from his own sweet place.”

“ Why, you are little better than a fool,
I think/’ said Crawley.

“ Little better, plase your honour; but I
was always so about them childer that I
nursed.”

" Childer ! Well, get along about your
business now, you see your nursing is riot
wanted here.”

<c I’ll not stir out of this, while he is here,”
said my nurse, catching hold of the leg of
the sofa, and clinging to it.

cc You’ll not stir, you say !” cried Captain
Crawley: cc Turn her out !”

“ Oh, sure you would not have the
cru’lty to turn his old nurse out before he’s
even cowld. And won’t you let me see him
buried?”

“ Out with her! out with her, the old
Irish hag ! We’ll have no howling here.
Out with her, John !” said Crawley to my
groom.

The groom hesitated, I fancy ; for Craw-
ley repeated the order more imperiously.
“ Out with her, or go yourself.”

“ May be it’s you that will go first your-
self,” said she.

“ Go first myself !” cried Captain Craw-
ley, furiously^ “ are you insolent to me ?"

“ And are not you cru’l to me, and to my
child I nursed, that lies all as one as dead
before you, and was a good friend to you in
his day, no doubt?”

Crawley seized hold of her; but she re-
sisted with so much energy, that she dragged
along with her the sofa to which she clung,
and on which I lay.

“ Stop!” cried I, starting up. There was

sudden silence. I looked round, but could
not utter another syllable. Now, for the
first time, I was sensible that I had been
really hurt by the fall. My head grew giddy,
and my stomach sick. I just saw Craw-
ley’s fallen countenance, and him and the
steward looking at one another; they were
like hideous faces in a dream. I sunk back.

“ Ay, lie down my darling, don’t be dis-
turbing yourself for such as them,” said my
nurse. “ Let them do what they will with
me; it’s little I’d care for them, if you were
but once in safe hands.”

I beckoned to the groom who had hesi-
tated to turn out Ellinor, and bid him go to
the housekeeper, and have me put to bed.
<( She,” added I, pointing to my old nurse,-
“ is to sit up with me at night.” It was all
I could say. What they did with me after-
wards, I do not know; but I was in my
bed, and a bandage was round my temples*
and my poor nurse was kneeling on one
side of the bed, with a string of beads in her
hand, and a surgeon and physician, and
Crawley and my Lady Glenthorn were on
the other side, whispering together. The
curtain was drawn between me and them 5

but the motion I made on wakening was in-
stantly observed by Crawley, who imme-
diately left the room. Lady Glenthorn
drew back my curtain, and began to ask me
how I did ; but when I fixed my eyes upon
her, she sunk upon the bed, trembling vio-
lently, and could not finish her sentence.
I begged her to go to rest, and she retired.
The physician ordered that I should be kept
quiet, and seemed to think I was in danger.
I asked what was the matter with me ? and
the surgeon, with a very grave face, informed
me, that I had an ugly contusion on my
head. I had heard of a concussion of the
brain; but I did not know distinctly what it
was, and my fears were increased by my ig-
norance. The life which, but a few hours
before, I had been on the point of voluntarily
destroying, because it was insupportably bur-
densome, I was now, the moment it was in
danger, most anxious to preserve ; and the
interest which I perceived others had in get-
ting rid of me, increased my desire to reco-
ver. My recovery was, however, for some
time doubtful. I was seized with a fever,
which left me in a state of alarming debility.
My old nurse, whom I shall henceforward

call by her name of Ellinor, attended me
with the most affectionate solicitude during
my illness * ; she scarcely stirred from my
bed-side, night or day: and, indeed, when I
came to the use of my senses, she was the
only person whom I really liked to have near
me. I knew that she was sincere, and, how-
ever unpolished her manners, and however
awkward her assistance, the good-will with
which it was given made me prefer it to
the most delicate and dexterous attentions,
which I believed to be interested. The very
want of a sense of propriety, and the free-
dom with which she talked to me, regardless
of what was suited to her station, or due to

* “ For fostering, I did never hear or read, that it was
in use or reputation in any country, barbarous or civil,
as it hath been, and yet is in Ireland. * * * * In the
opinion of this people, fostering hath always been a
stronger alliance than blood ; and the foster-children
do love and are beloved of their foster-fathers and their
sept (or dan), more than of their natural parents and
kindred ; and do participate of their means more frank-
ly, and do adhere unto them, in all fortunes, with more
affection and constancy.* 
Such a general custom in a kingdom, in giving and
taking children to foster, making such a firm alliance
as it doth in Ireland, was never seen or heard of in any
other country of the world beside ”	Davies.

my rank, instead of offending or disgusting
me, became agreeable; besides, the novelty
of her dialect, and of her turn of thought,
entertained me as much as a sick man could
be entertained. I remember once her tell-
ing me, that “ if it plased God she would
like to die on a Christmas-day, of all days;
because the gates of Heaven, they say, will
be open all that day; and who knows but a
body might slip in unknownst When she
sat up with me at nights, she talked on eter-
nally; for she assured me there was nothing
like talking, as she had always found, to put
one asy asleep. I listened or not, just as I
liked; any way she was content. She was
inexhaustible in her anecdotes of my ances-
tors, all tending to the honour and glory of
the family ; she had also an excellent memory
for all the insults, or traditions of insults,which
the Glenthorns had received for many ages
back, even to the times of the old kings of
Ireland; long and long before they stooped
to be lorded ; when their “ names, which it
was a pity and a murder, and moreover a
burning shame, to change, was O’Shagnasee.
She was well stored with histories of Irish
and Scottish chiefs. The story of O’NeilJ,

the Irish black-beard, I am sure I ought to
remember, for Ellinor told it to me at least
six times. Then she had a large assortment
of fairies and shadowless* witches, and ban-
shees-, and besides, she had legions of spirits
and ghosts, and haunted castles without end,
my own castle of Glenthorn not excepted,
in the description of which she was extremely
eloquent ; she absolutely excited in my mind
some desire to see it. cc For many a long
year,” she said, cc it had been her nightly
prayer, that she might live to see me in my
own castle ; and often and often she was
coming over to England to tell me so, only
her husband, as long as he lived, would not
let her set out on what he called a fool’s er-
rand; but it pleased God to take him to
himself last fair day, and then she resolved
that nothing should hinder her to be with
her own child against his birth-day; and now
could she see me in my own Castle Glen-
thorn, she would die contint—and what a
pity but I should be in it! I was only a
lord, as she said, in England; but I could
be all as one as a king in Ireland.”

* In Ireland it is a belief among the vulgar, that
witches have no shadows.

Ellinor impressed me with the idea of the
sort of feudal power I should possess in my
vast territory over tenants, who were almost
vassals, and amongst a numerous train of
dependants. We resist the efforts made by
those who, we think, exert authority or em-
ploy artifice to change our determinations,
whilst the perverse mind insensibly yields
to those, who appear not to have power, or
reason, or address sufficient to obtain a vic-
tory. I should not have heard any human
being with patience try to persuade me to
go to Ireland, except this ignorant poor
nurse, who spoke, as I thought, merely from
the instinct of affection to me and to her na-
tive country. I promised her that I would,
sometime or other, visit Glenthorn Castle:
but this was only a vague promise, and it
was but little likely that it should be ac-
complished. As I regained my strength,
my mind turned, or rather was turned, to
other thoughts.

CHAPTER IV.

ONE morning—it was the day after my
physicians had pronounced me out of all
danger, Crawley sent me a note by Ellinor,
congratulating me upon my recovery, and
begging to speak to me for half an hour.
I refused to see him, and said, that I was
not yet well enough to do business. The
same morning Ellinor came with a message
from Turner, my steward, who, with his
humble duty, requested to see me for five
minutes, to communicate to me something of
importance. I consented to see Turner. Me
entered with a face of suppressed joy and
affected melancholy.

“ Sad news I am bound in duty to be the
bearer of, my lord. I was determined, what-
ever came to pass, however, not to speak till
your honour was out of danger, which I
thank Heaven, is now the case, and I am
happy to be able to congratulate your lord-
ship upon looking as well as----■”

“ Never mind my looks. I will excuse
your congratulations, Mr. Turner,” said I,
impatiently; for the recollection of the ban-
quetting-house, and the undertaker, whom
Turner was so eager to introduce, came full
into my mind—“ Go on, if you please; five
minutes is all I am at present able to give to
any business, and you sent me word you had
something of importance to communicate.”
“ True, my lord; but in case your lord-
ship is not at present well enough, or not so
disposed, I will wait your lordship’s leisure.”
“ Now or never, Mr. Turner. Speak,
but speak at once.”

“ My lord, I would have done so long ago,
but was loath to make mischief; and besides,
could not believe what I heard whispered,
and would scarce believe what I verily saw' ;
though now, as I cannot reasonably have a
doubt, I think it would be a sin, and a bur-
den upon my conscience, not to speak; only
that I am unwilling to shock your lordship
too much, when but just recovering, for that
is not the time one would wish to tell or to
hear disagreeable things.”

“ Mr. Turner, either come to the point

at once, or leave me, for I am not strong
enough to bear this suspense.”

“ I beg pardon, my lord: why, then my
lord, the point is Captain Crawley.”

“ What of him ? I never desire to hear his
name again.”

C£ Nor I, I am sure, my lord; but there
are some in the house might not be of our
opinion.”

<c Who? you sneaking fellow; speak out,
can’t you ?”

“ My lady—my lord------Now it is out.

She’ll go off with him this night, if not pre-
vented.”

My surprise and indignation were as
great, as if I had always been the fondest
and the most attentive of husbands. I was
at length roused from that indifference and
apathy into which I had sunk; and though
I had never loved my wife, the moment I
knew she was lost to me forever was exqui-
sitely painful. Astonishment, the sense of
disgrace, the feeling of rage against that
treacherous parasite, by whom she had been
seduced, all combined to overwhelm me.
I could command my voice only enough

to bid Turner leave the room, and tell no
one that he had spoken to me on this sub-
ject.—“ Not a soul,” he said, “ should be
told, or could guess it.”

Left to my own reflections, as soon as the
first emotions of anger subsided, I blamed
myself for my conduct to Lady Glen thorn.
I considered, that she had been married to
me by her friends, when she was too young
and too childish to judge for herself; that
from the first day of our marriage I had never
made the slightest effort to win her affections,
or to guide her conduct; that, on the con-
trary, T had shown her marked indifference,
if not aversion. With fashionable airs, I had
professed, that provided she left me at liberty
to spend the large fortune which she brought
me, and in consideration of which she en-
joyed the title of Countess of Glenthorn, I
cared for nothing farther. With the conse-
quences of my neglect I now reproached my-
self in vain. Lady Glenthorn’s immense
fortune had paid my debts, and had for two
years supplied my extravagance, or rather
my indolence : little remained, and she was
now, in her twentieth year, to be consigned
to public disgrace, and to a man whom I

knew to be destitute of honour and feeling.—
I pitied her, and resolved to go instantly
and make an effort to save her from de-
struction.

Ellinor, who watched all Crawley’s mo-
tions, informed me, that he was gone to a
neighbouring town, and had left word that
he should not be home till after dinner.
Lady Glenthorn was in her dressing-room,
which was at a part of the house farthest
from that which I now inhabited. I had
never left my room since my illness, and
had scarcely walked farther than from my
bed to my arm-chair; but I was so much
roused by my feelings at this instant, that to
Ellinor’s great astonishment, I started from
my chair, and, forbidding her to follow me,
walked without any assistance along the
corridor, which led to the back-stairs, and
to Lady Glenthorn’s apartment. I opened
the private door of her dressing-room
suddenly—the room was in great disorder—
her woman was upon her knees packing a
trunk: Lady Glenthorn was standing at a
table, with a parcel of open letters before
her, and a diamond necklace in her hand.

She started at the sight of me as if she had
beheld a ghost: the maid screamed, and ran
to a door at the farther end of the room, to
make her escape, but that was bolted. Lady
Glenthorn was pale and motionless, till I
approached, and then recollecting herself,
she reddened all over, and thrust the letters
into her table drawer. Her woman, at the
same instant, snatched a casket of jewels,
swept up in her arms a heap of clothes, and
huddled them altogether into the half-
packed trunk.

<c Leave the room,” said I to her sternly^.

J %/

She locked the trunk, pocketed the key, and
obeyed.

I placed a chair for Lady Glenthorn, and
sat down myself. We were almost equally
unable to stand. We were silent for some
moments. Her eyes were fixed upon the
ground, and she leaned her head upon her
hand in an attitude of despair. I could
scarcely articulate, but making an effort to
command my voice, I at last said—

“ Lady Glenthorn, I blame myself more
than you for all that has happened.”

“ For what?” said she, making a feeble
attempt at evasion, yet at the same time

casting a guilty look towards the drawer of
letters.

“ You have nothing to conceal from
me,” said I.

—-cc Nothing,’' said she, in a feeble voice.
“ Nothing !” said I, “ for I know every
thing”—She started—“ and am willing to
pardon every thing.”

She looked up in my face astonished. cc I
am conscious,” continued I, “ that you
have not been well treated by me. You
have had much reason to complain of my
neglect. To this I attribute your errour.—
Forget the past—I will set you the ex-
ample.—Promise me never to see the man
more, and what has happened shall never
be known to the world.”

She made me no answer, but burst into a
flood of tears. She seemed incapable of de-
cision, or even of thought. I felt suddenly
inspired with energy.

“ Write this moment,” continued I,
placing a pen and ink before her,—“ write
to forbid him ever to return to this house,
or ever more to appear in your presence.
If he appears in mine, I know how to chas-
tise him, and to vindicate my own honour

To preserve your reputation, I refrain, upon
these conditions, from making my contempt
of him public.”

I put a pen into Lady Glenthorn’s hand ;
but she trembled so that she could not
write. She made several ineffectual at-
tempts, then tore the paper, and again
giving way to tears, exclaimed—

“ I cannot write—I cannot think—I do
not know what to say. AY rite what you
will, and I will sign it.”

CCT write to Captain Crawley! Write
what / will !”	“ Lady Glenthorn, it must

be your ‘will to write, not mine. If it be
not your will, say so.”

“ Oh ! I do not say so—I do not say that.
Give me a moment’s time. I do not know
what I say. I have been very foolish—very
wicked. You are very good—but it is too
late : it will all be known. Crawley will
betray me; he will tell it to Mrs. Mat-
tocks : so whichever way I turn I am un-
done.—Oh ! what will become of me?”

She wrung her hands and wept, and was
for an hour in this State, in all the indecision
and imbecility of a child. At last she wrote
a few scarcely legible lines to Crawley, for-

bidding him to see or think of her more.
I dispatched the note, and she was full of
penitence, and gratitude, and tears. The
nest morning, when I wakened, I in my
turn received a note from her ladyship.

Since I saw you, Captain Crawley has
convinced me that I am his wife, in the,eye
of Heaven, and I therefore desire a divorce,
as much as your whole conduct, since my
marriage, convinces me you must.ip y.our
heart, whatever may be your motives to
pretend otherwise. Before you, receive this
I shall be out of your way, and beyond your
reach ; so do not think of pursuing one who
is no longer

“ Yours.

“ A. Crawley.”

After reading this note, I thought not of
pursuing or saving Lady Glenthorn. I was
as anxious for a divorce as she could be.
—Some months afterwards the affair was
brought to a public trial. When the cause
came on, so many circumstances were
brought in mitigation of damages, to prove
my utter carelessness respecting my wife’s

conduct, that a suspicion of collusion arose.
From this imputation I was clear in the
opinion of all who really knew me, and I
repelled the charge publicly, with a degree
of indignation that surprised all who knew
the usual apathy of my temper. I must
observe, that during the whole time my
divorce bill was pending, and whilst I was
in the greatest possible anxiety, my health
was perfectly good. But no sooner was
the affair settled, and a decision made in
my favour, than I relapsed into my old
nervous complaints.

CHAPTER V.

“ ’Twas doing nothing was his curse.

“ Is there a vice can plague us worse?

“ The wretch who digs the mine for bread,

** Or ploughs, that others may be fed,

** Feels less fatigue than that decreed

** To him who cannot think or read.”

*

Illness was a sort of occupation to me,
and I was always sorry to get well. When
the interest of being in danger ceased, I
had no other to supply its place. I fancied
that I should enjoy my liberty after my
divorce ; but “ even freedom grew taste-
less.” I do not recollect any thing that
wakened me from my torpor, during two
months after my divorce, except a violent
quarrel between all my English servants
and my Irish nurse. Whether she assumed
too much, upon the idea that she was a fa-
vourite, or whether national prejudice was
alone the cause of the hatred that prevailed
against her, I know not; but they one and
all declared, that they could not, and would

not, live with her. She expressed the same
dislike to consorting with them; “ but
would put up with worse, aye, with the
devils themselves, to oblige my honour, and
to lie under the same roof wid my honour.”

The rest of the servants laughed at her
blunders. This she could bear with good
humour ; but when they seriously affected
to reproach her with having, by her un-
couth appearance at her first presenting
herself at Sherwood Park, endangered my
life, she retorted.

“ And who cared for him in the wide
world but I, amongst you all, when he lay
for dead ? I ask you that,” said she.

To this there was no reply ; and they
hated her the more for their having been
silenced by her shrewdness. I protected
her as long as I could ; but, for the sake
of peace, I at last yielded to the combined
forces of the steward’s room and the ser-
vants’ hall, and dispatched Ellinor to Ire-
land, with a renewal of the promise, that I
would visit Glenthorn castle this year or the
next. To comfort her at parting, I would
have made her a considerable present; but
she would take only a few guineas, to bear

her expenses back to her native place. The
sacrifice I made did not procure me a peace
of any continuance in my own house ;
ruined by indulgence, and by my indolent,
reckless temper, my servants were now my
masters. In a large, ill-regulated establish-
ment, domestics become, like spoiled child-
ren, discontented, capricious, and the ty-
rants over those who have not the sense or
steadiness to command. I remember one
delicate puppy parted with me, because, as
he informed me, the curtains of his bed did
not close at the foot ; he had never been
used to such a thing, and had told the
housekeeper so three times, but could ob-
tain no redress, which necessitated him to
beg my permission to retire from the service.

In his stead another coxcomb came to
offer himself, who, with an incomparably
easy air, begged to know whether I wanted
a man of figure or a man of parts ? For the
benefit of those to whom this fashionable
classification of domestics may not be fa-
miliar, I should observe, that the depart-
ment of a man of figure is specially and
solely to announce company on gala days;
the business of the man of parts is multifa-

rious: to write cards of invitation, to speak
to impertinent tradesmen, to carry confi-
dential messages, et cetera. Now, where
there is an et cetera in an agreement, there
is always an opening for dispute. The
functions of the man of parts not being ac-
curately defined, I unluckily required from
him some service, which was not in his
bond : I believe it was to go for my pocket
handkerchief—c< He could not possibly do
it, because it was not his business and I,
the laziest of mortals, after waiting a full
quarter of an hour, whilst they were set-
tling whose business it was to obey me, was
forced to get up and go for what I wanted.
I comforted myself by the recollection of
the poor king of Spain and le brasier. With
a regal precedent I could not but be satis-
fied. All great people, said I to myself,
are obliged to submit to these inconvenL
ences. I submitted with so good a grace,
that my submission was scarcely felt to be
a condescension. My bachelor's house soon
exhibited in perfection, cc High Life below
Stairs.”

It is said, that a foreign nobleman per-
mitted his servants to take their own way

so completely, that one night he and his
guests being kept waiting an unconscion-
able time for supper, he at last went down
stairs to inquire into the cause of the delay:
he found the servant, whose business it was
to take up supper, quietly at cards with a
large party of his friends. The man coolly
remonstrated, that it was impossible to leave
his game unfinished. The master candidly
acknowledged the force of his plea; but in-
sisted upon the man’s going up stairs tp lay
the cloth for supper, whilst he took ‘his
cards, sat down, and finished the game for
him.

The suavity of my temper never abso-
lutely reached this degree of complaisance.
My home disagreeable to me : I had
not the resolution to remove the causes of
the discontents. Every day I swore I would
part with all these rascals the next morn-
ing; but still they staid. Abroad I was
not happier than at home. I was disgusted
with my former companions; they had
convinced me, the night of my accident at
Sherwood Park, that they cared not whe-
ther I was alive or dead : and ever since
that time I had been more and more struck

with their selfishness, as well as folly. It
was inexpressibly fatiguing and irksome to
me to keep up a show of good fellowship
and joviality with these people, though I
had not sufficient energy to make the at-
tempt to quit them. When these dashers
and loungers found that I was not always
at their disposal, they discovered that Glen-
thorn had always something odd about him ;
that Glenthorn had always a melancholy
turn; that it ran in the family, &c. Sa-
tisfied with these phrases, they let me take
my own way, and forgot my existence.
Public amusements had lost their charm ;
I had sufficient steadiness to resist the temp-
tation to game : but, for want of stimulus,
I could hardly endure the tedium of my
days. At this period of my life, ennui was
very near turning into misanthropy. I ba-
lanced between, becoming a misanthrope
and a democrat.

Whilst I was in this critical state of inep-
titude, my attention was accidentally roused
by the sight of a boxing match. My feel-
ings were so much excited, and the excita-
tion was so delightful, that I was now in
danger of becoming an amateur of the pu-

gilistic art. It did not occur to me, that
it was beneath the dignity of a British no-
bleman, to learn the vulgar terms of the
boxing trade. I soon began to talk very
knowingly of first rate bruisers, game men,
and pleasing fighters, making play—beating
a man under the ropes—sparring—rallying
—-sawing—and chopping. What farther
proficiency I might have made in this lan-
guage, or how long my interest in these
feats of prize-fighters might have continued,
had I been left to myself, I cannot deter-
mine ; but I was unexpectedly seized with
a fit of national shame, on hearing a fo-
reigner of rank and reputation express asto-
nishment at our taste for these savage spec-
tacles. It was in vain that I repeated the
arguments of some of the parliamentary pa-
negyrists of boxing and bull-baiting ; and
asserted, that these diversions render a peo-
ple hardy and courageous. My opponent
replied, that he did not perceive the neces-
sary connexion between cruelty and cou-
rage ; that he did not comprehend how the
standing by in safety to see two men bruise
each other almost to death could evince or
inspire heroic sentiments or warlike dispo-

sitions. He observed, that the Romans
were most eager for the fights of gladiators
during the reigns of the most effeminate and
cruel emperors, and in the decline of all
public spirit and virtue. These arguments
would have probably made but a feeble im-
pression on an understanding like mine, un-
accustomed to general reasoning, and oh
a temper habituated to pursue, without
thought of consequences, my immediate
individual gratification ; but it happened
that my feelings were touched at this time
by the dreadful sufferings of one of the pu-
gilistic combatants. He died a few hours
after the battle. He was an Irishman :
most of the spectators being English, and
triumphing in the victory of their country-
man, the poor fellow’s fate was scarcely
noticed. I spoke to him a little while be-
fore he died, and found that he came from
my own county. His name was Michael
Noonan. He made it his dying request,
that I would carry half a guinea, the only
money he possessed, to his aged father, and
a silk handkerchief he had worn round his
neck to his sister. Pity for this unfor-
tunate Irishman recalled Ireland to my

thoughts. Many small reasons concurred
to make me now desirous of going to that
country. I should get rid at once of a tor-
menting establishment, and of servants,
without the odium of turning them away ;
for they all declined going into banishment,
as they called it. Beside this, I should
leave my companions, with whom I was
disgusted. I was tired of England, and
wanted to see something new, even if it
were to be worse than what I had seen be-
fore. These were not my ostensible rea-
sons : I professed to have more exalted mo-
tives for my journey. It was my duty, I
said, to visit my Irish estate, and to en-
courage my tenantry, by residing some time
among them. Duties often spring up to
our view at a convenient opportunity. Then
my promise to poor Ellinor. It was im-
possible for a man of honour to break a
promise, even to an old woman. In short,
when people are determined upon any ac-
tion, they seldom fail to find arguments
capable of convincing them, that their re-
solution is reasonable. Mixed motives go-
vern the conduct of half mankind ; so I set
out upon my journey to Ireland.

CHAPTER VI.

I WAS detained six days by contrary
winds at Holyhead ; sick of that miserable
place, in my ill humour I cursed Ireland,
and twice resolved to return to London :
but the wind changed, my carriage was on
board the packet, so I sailed, and landed
safely in Dublin. I was surprised by the
excellence of the hotel at which I was
lodged. I had not conceived, that such
excellent accommodation could have been
found in Dublin. The house had, as I was
told, belonged to a nobleman : it was fitted
up and appointed with a degree of ele-
gance, and even magniticence, beyond what
I had been used to in the most fashionable
hotels in London.

“ Ah ! sir,” said an Irish gentleman, who
found me in admiration upon the staircase,
“ this is all very good, very fine, but it is
too good and too fine to last ; come here
again in two years, and I am afraid you

will see all this going to rack and ruin. This
is too often the case with us in Ireland ; we
can project, but we can’t calculate: we
must have every thing upon too large a
scale. We mistake a grand beginning for
a good beginning. - We begin like princes,
and we end like beggars.”

I rested only a few days in a capital, in
which, I took it for granted, there could
be nothing worth seeing by a person who
was just come from London. In driving
through the streets, I was however surprised
to see buildings, which my prejudices could
scarcely believe to be Irish. I also saw
some things, which recalled to my mind the
observations I had heard at my hotel. I
was struck with instances of grand begin-
nings and lamentable want of finish, with
mixtures of the magnificent and the paltry;
of admirable and execrable taste : some
which reminded me of the Elector of Bran-
denburgh’s gilt coach*, stuck up over- one
of the finest modern imitations of Grecian
architecture. Though my understanding
was wholly uncultivated, these things struck

* The gate of Brandenburgh-house, in Berlin, built
on the model of the Athenian Propyleum.

my eye. Of all the faculties of my mind,
my taste had been most exercised, because
its exercise had given me least trouble.

Impatient to see my own castle, I left
Dublin. I was again astonished by the
beauty of the prospects, and the excellence
of the roads. I had in my ignorance be-
lieved, that I was never to see a tree in
Ireland, and that the roads were almost im-
passable. With the promptitude of credu-
lity, I now went from one extreme to the
other : I concluded that we should travel
with the same celerity as upon the Bath
road; and I expected, that a journey for
which four days had been allotted might be
performed in two. Like all those who have
nothing to do any where, I was always in
a prodigious hurry to get from place to
place; and I ever had a noble ambition to
go over as much ground as possible in a
given space of time. I travelled in a light
barouche, and with my own horses. My
own man, an Englishman, and my cook, a
Frenchman, followed in a hackney chaise ;
I cared not how, so that they kept up with
me ; the rest was their affair. At night,
my gentleman complained bitterly of the

Irish post carriages, and besought me to
let him follow at an easier rate the next'
day ; but to this I could by no means con-
sent: for how could I exist without my
own man aud my French cook ? In the
morning, just as I was ready to set off, and
had thrown myself back in my carriage, my
Englishman and Frenchman came to the
door, both in so great a rage, that the one
was inarticulate, and the other unintelli-
gible, At length the object of their indig-
nation spoke for itself. From the inn yard
came a hackney chaise, in a most deplo-
rably crazy state 3 the body mounted up to
a prodigious height, on unbending springs*
nodding forwards, one door swinging open,
three blinds up, because they could not be
let down, the perch tied in two places, the
iron of the wheels half off, half loose,
wooden pegs for linch-pins, and ropes for
harness. The horses were worthy of the
harness; wretched little dog-tired creatures,
that looked as if they had been driven to
the last gasp, and as if they had never been
rubbed down in their lives ; their bones
starting through their skin 3 one lame* the
other blind; one with a raw back, tho

other with a galled breast; one with his
neck poking down over his collar, and the
other with his head dragged, forward by a,
bit of a broken bridle, held at arms’ length
by a. man dressed like a mad beggar, in
half a hat and half a wig, both awry in op-
posite directions; a long tattered great
coat,, tied round his waist by a hay-rope ;
the jagged rents in. the skirts of this coat
showing his bare legs, marbled of many
colours; while something like stockings
hung loose about his ankles. The noises
he made, by way of threatening or encou-
raging his steeds, I pretend not to describe.

In an indignant voice I called to the
landlord—“ I hope these are not the
horses—I hope this is not the chaise, in-
tended for my servants.”

The innkeeper, and the pauper who was
preparing to officiate as postillion, both in
the same instant exclaimed—

“ Sorrow better chaise in the county !”
ce Sorrow /” said I—“ what do you mean
by sorrow?”

tc That there’s no better, plase your ho-
nour, can be seen. We have two more to
be sure—but one has no top, and the other

no bottom. Any way there’s no better
can be seen than this same*.”

££ And these horses/’ cried, L—££ why
this horse is so lame he can hardly stand.”
££ Oh, plase your honour, tho’ he can’t
stand, he’ll go fast enough. He has a great
deal of the rogue in him, plase your honour.
He’s always that way at first setting out.”
££ And that wretched animal with, the
galled breast !”

££ He’s all the better for it, when once
he warms; it’s he that will go with the
speed of light, plase your honour. Sure,
is not he Knockecroghery ? and didn’t I
give fifteen guineas for him, barring the
luck penny, at the fair of Knockecroghery,
and he rising four year old at the same
time ?”

I could not avoid smiling at this speech ;
but my gentleman, maintaining his angry
gravity, declared, in a sullen tone, that he
would be cursed if he went with such
horses ; and the Frenchman, with abun-
dance of gesticulation, made a prodigious
chattering, which no mortal understood.

* Verbatim.

“ Then I’ll tell you what you’ll do,”
said Paddy ; “ you’ll take four, as becomes
gentlemen of your quality, and you’ll see
how we’ll powder along/’

And straight he put the knuckle of his
fore-finger in his mouth, and whistled shrill
and strong ; and, in a moment, a whistle
somewhere out in the fields answered him.

I protested against these proceedings,
but in vain ; before the first pair of horses
were fastened to the chaise, up came a little
boy with the others fresh from the plough.
They were quick enough in putting these
to; yet how they managed it with their
tackle, I know not. “ Now we’re fixed
handsomely,” said Paddy.

<c But this chaise will break down the
first mile.”

“ Is it this chaise, plase your honour ?
I’ll engage it will go the world’s end.
The universe wouldn’t break it down now ;
sure it was mended but last night.”

Then seizing his whip and reins in one
hand, he clawed up his stockings with the
other; so with one easy step he got into
his place, and seated himself, coachman-
like, upon a well-worn bar of wood, that

served as a coach-box. fC Throw me the
loan of a trusty Bartly, for a cushion,” said
he. A frieze coat was thrown up over the
horse’s heads—Paddy caught it.	Where

are you, Hosey,” cried he. “ Sure I’m
only rowling a wisp of straw on my leg,”
replied Hosey. cc Throw me up,” added
this paragon of -postillions, turning to one
of the crowd of idle by-standers. “ Arrah,
push me up, can’t ye ?”

A man took hold of his knee, and threw
him upon the horse ; he was in his seat in
a trice ; then clinging by the mane of his
horse, he scrambled for the bridle which
was under the other horse’s feet—reached
it, and well satisfied with himself, looked
round at Paddy, who looked back to the
chaise door at my angry servants, “ secure
in the last event of things.” In vain the
Englishman in monotonous anger, and the
Frenchman in every note of the gamut,
abused Paddy ; necessity and wit were on
Paddy’s side : he parried all that was said
against his chaise, his horses, himself, and
his country, with invincible comic dexte-
rity, till at last both his adversaries, dumb-
founded, clambered into the vehicle, where

they were instantly -shut up in straw and
darkness. Paddy, in a triumphant tone,
called to my postillions, bidding them “ get
on, andmot be stopping the way any longer.”
Without uttering a syllable, they drove
on ; but they could not, nor could I refrain
fromlooking back to see how those fellow's
would manage. We saw the fore-horses
make towards the right, then to the left,
and every way but straight forwards ;
whilst Paddy bawled to .Hosey—“ Keep
the middle of the road, can’t ye ? I don’t
want ye to draw a:pound at all at all.”

.At last, by dint of whipping, the four
horses were compèlled to set off in a lame
gallop ; but they stopped short at a hill
near the end of-the town, whilst a shouting
troop of ragged boys followed, and pushed
them fair}y to the top. Half an hour after-
wards, as *w.e were putting on our drag-
chain to go down another steep hill, to my
utter astonishment, Paddy, with his horses
in full gallop, came rattling and chehupjnng
past ) us. My people called to w arn : him
that he bad no dr.ag, but still-he cried—
“ Never fear!”—and shaking the long
reins, and stamping-with his foot, on he

went thundering down ‘the hill. My En-
glishmen were aghast.

“ The turn'yonder below, at the bottom
of the hill, is as sharp and ugly as ever I
see,” said my rpostillion, after a moment's
stupified silence. “ He will break their
necks, as sure as my name is John.”

Quite the contrary; when we had drag-
ged and undragged, and came up with
Paddy, we found him safe on his legs,
mending some of his tackle very quietly.

cc If that breeching had broke as you
were going down the steep hill,” said I,
“ it would have been all over with you,
Paddy.”

“ That's true, plase your honour; but it
never happened me going down hill—nor
never will, by the blessing of God, if I've
any luck.”

With this mixed confidence in a special
providence, and in his own good luck,
Paddy went on, much to my amusement.
It was his glory to keep before us, and he
rattled on till he came to a narrow part of
the road, where they were rebuilding a
bridge. Here there was a dead stop. Paddy
lashed his horses, and called them all man-

ner of names ; but the wheel horse, Knocke-
croghery, was restive, and at last began to
kick most furiously. It seemed inevitable
that the first kick which should reach the
splinter bar, at which it was aimed, must
demolish it instantly. My English gentle-
man and my Frenchman both put their
heads out of the only window which was
pervious, and called most manfully to be
let out. ct Never fear,” said Paddy. To
open the door for themselves, was beyond
their force or skill. One of the hind wheels,
which had belonged to another carriage,
was too high to suffer the door to be open-
ed, and the blind at the other side prevented
their attempts, so they were close prisoners.
The men who had been at work on the
broken bridge came forward, and rested on
their spades to see the battle. As my car-
riage could not pass, I also was compelled
to be a spectator of this contest between
man and horse.

“ Never fear,” reiterated Paddy ; “ I’ll
engage I’ll be up wid him. Now for it
Knockecroghery ! Oh the rogue, he thinks
he has me at a nonplushy but ITI show him
the differ.”

After this brag of war, Paddy whipped,
Knockecroghery kicked, and Paddy, seem-
ingly unconscious of danger, sat within,
reach of the kicking horse, twitching up
first one of his legs, then the other, and
shifting as the animal aimed his hoofs,
escaping every time as it were by miracle.
With a mixture of temerity and presence of
mind, which made us alternately look upon
him as a madman and a hero, he gloried in
the danger, secure of success, and of the
sympathy of the spectators.

“ Ah ! didn’t I compass him cleverly
then ? Oh the villain, to be browbating me !
I’m too cute for him yet. See, there now,
he’s come to ; and I’ll be his bail he’ll go
asy enough wid me. Ogh ! he has a fine
spirit of his own, but it’s I that can match
him ; ’twould be a poor case if a man like
me couldn’t match a horse any way, let
alone a mare, which this is, or it never
would be so vicious.”

After this hard-fought battle, and suit-
able rejoicing for the victory, Paddy walked
his subdued adversary on a few yards to
allow us to pass him ; but to the dismay of
my postillions, a hay-rope was at this in-

stant thrown across the road, before our
horses, by the road-makers, who, to explain
this proceeding, cried out, cc Plase your
honour, the road is so dry, we’d expect a
trifle to wet it.”

“ What do these fellows mean?” said I.
“ It’s only a tester or a hog they want,
your honour, to give ’em to drink your
honour’s health,” said Paddy.

<c A hog to drink my health ?”

<c Ay, that is a thirteen, plase your ho-
nour; all as one as an English shilling.”

I threw them a shilling; the hay-rope
was withdrawn, and at last we went on.
We heard no more of Paddy till evening.
He came in two hours after us, and ex-
pected to be doubly paid for driving 7iiy
honour’s gentlemen so zvell.

I must say that on this journey, though
I met with many delays and disasters ;
though one of my horses was lamed in shoe-
ing by a smith, who came home drunk
from a funeral ; and though the back pan-
nel of my carriage was broken by the pole
of a chaise; and though one day I went
without my dinner at a large desolate inn,
where nothing was to be had but whiskey ;

and though one night I lay in a little smoky
den, in which the meanest of my servants
in England would have thought it impos-
sible to sleep; and though I complained
bitterly, and swore it was impracticable for
a gentleman to travel in Ireland; yet I
never remember to have experienced, on
any journey, less ennui. I was out of pa-
tience twenty times a day, but I certainly
felt no ennui ; and I am convinced, that
the benefit some patients receive from a
journey is in an inverse proportion to the
ease and luxury of their mode of travelling.
When they are compelled to exert their fa-
culties, and to use their limbs, they forget
their nerves, as I did. Upon this principle
I should recommend to wealthy hypochon-
driacs a journey in Ireland, preferably to
any country in the civilized world. I can
promise them, that they will not only be
moved to anger often enough to make their
blood circulate briskly, but, they will even,
in the acmé of their impatience, be thrown
into salutary convulsions of laughter, by
the comic concomitants of their disasters ;
besides, if they have hearts, their best feel-
ings cannot fail to be awakened by the

warm, generous hospitality they will re-
ceive in this country, from the cabin to the
castle.

Late in the evening of the fourth day,
we came to an inn on the verge of the
county where my estate was situate. It
was one of the wildest parts of Ireland.
We could find no horses, nor accommoda-
tions of any sort, and we had several miles
farther to go. For our only comfort, the
dirty landlady, who had married the host-
ler, and wore gold drop ear-rings, reminded
us, that, “ Sure, if we could but wait an
hour, and take a fresh egg, we should have
a fine moon.”

After many fruitless imprecations, my
French cook was obliged to mount one of
my saddle-horses ; my groom was left to
follow us the next day ; I let my gentleman
sit on the barouche box, and proceeded
with*, my own tired horses. The moon,
which my landlady had promised me, rose,
and I had a full view of the face of the
country. As we approached my maritime
territories, the cottages were thinly scat-
tered, and the trees had a stunted appear-
ance; they all slanted one way, from the

prevalent winds that blew from the ocean.
Our road presently stretched along the
beach, and I saw nothing to vary the pro*
spect but rocks, and their huge shadows up-
on the water. The road being sandy, the
feet of the horses made no noise, and no*
thing interrupted the silence of the night,
but the hissing sound of the carriage wheels
passing through the sand.

“ What o’clock is it now, think you,
John ?” said one of my postillions to the
other»

“ Past twelve for sartain,” said John;
“ and this bees a strange Irish place,” con-
tinued he, in a drawling voice; “ with no
possible way o’ getting at it,‘as I see.”
John, after a pause, resumed—“ I say,
Timothy, to the best of my opinion, this
here road is leading on us into the sea.”
John replied, “ that he did suppose there
might be such a thing as a boat farther on,
but where he could not say for sarlain.”
Dismayed and helpless, they at last stop-
ped to consult whether they had come the
right road to the house. In the midst of
their consultation there came up an Irish

carman, whistling as lie walked beside his
horse and car.

“ Honest friend, is this the road to Glen-
thorn Castle ?”

<c To Glenthorn, sure enough, your ho-
nour.”

“ Whereabouts is the castle ?”

“ Forenent you, if you go on to the turn.”
4‘ Forenent you !” As the postillions
pondered upon this word, the carman,
leaving his horse and car, turned back to
explain by action, what he could not make
intelligible by words.

<c See, isn’t here the castle ?” cried he,
darting before us to the turn of the road,
where he stood pointing at what we could
not possibly see, as it was hid by a pro-
montory of rock. When we reached the
spot where he was stationed, we came full
upon the view of Glenthorn Castle ; it
seemed to rise from the sea, abrupt and in-
sulated, in all the gloomy grandeur of an-
cient times, with turrets and battlements,
and a huge gateway, the pointed arch of
which receded in perspective between the
projecting towers.

“ It’s my lord himself, I'm fond to be-
lieve !” said our guide, taking off his hat—
44 I had best step on and tell 'em at the
castle.”

“ No, my good friend, there is no occa-
sion to trouble you farther; you had better
go back to your horse and car, which you
have left on the road."

44 Oh ! they are used to that, plase your
honour; they’ll go on very quite> and I’ll
run like a redshank with the news to the
castle.”

He ran on before us with surprising ve-
locity, whilst our tired horses dragged us
slowly through the sand. As we ap-
proached, the gateway of the castle opened,
and a number of men, who appeared to be
dwarfs, when compared with the height of
the building, came out with torches in their
hands: by their bustle, and the vehemence
with which they bawled to one another,
one might have thought that the whole
castle was in flames; but they were only
letting down a draw-bridge. As I was go-
ing over this bridge, a casement window
opened in the castle, and a voice, which I
knew to be old Ellinor's, exclaimed,44 Mind

the big hole in the middle of the bridge,
God bless yeas !”

I passed over the broken bridge, and
through the massive gate, under an arched
way, at the farthest end of which a lamp
had just been lighted; then I came into a
large open area, the court of the castle.
The hollow sound of the horses feet and
of the carriage rumbling over the draw-
bridge was immediately succeeded by the
strange and eager voices of the people,
who filled the court with variety of noises,
contrasting, in the most striking manner
with the silence, in which we had travelled
over the sands. The great effect that my
arrival instantaneously produced upon the
multitude of servants and dependants who
issued from the castle, gave me an idea of
my own consequence beyond any thing
which I had ever felt in England. These
people seemed “ born for my use the
officious precipitation with which they ran
to and fro; the style in which they ad-
dressed me ; some crying, iC Long life to
the Earl of Glenthorn !” some blessing me
for coming to reign over them ; altogether
gave more the idea of vassals than of

tenants* and carried my imagination cen-
turies back to feudal times.

The first person I saw on entering the
hall of my castle was poor Ellinor* she
pushed her way up to me—

cc ’Tis himself!” cried she. Then turning
about suddenly* “ I’ve seen him in his own
castle—I’ve seen him—and if it pleases God
this minute to take me to himself* I would
die with pleasure.”

“ My good Ellinor,” said I* touched to the
heart by her affection, “ my good Ellinor* I
hope you will live many a happy year* and

if I can contribute------“ And himself to

speak to me so kind before them all !” in-
terrupted she. “ Oh ! this is too much—
quite too much !” She burst into tears * and
hiding her face with her arm* made her way
out of the hall.

The flights of stairs which I had to as-
cend, and the length of galleries through
which I was conducted, before I reached
the apartment where supper was served*
gave me a vast idea of the extent of my
castle ; but I was too much fatigued to en-
joy fully the gratifications of pride. To
the simple pleasures of appetite I was more

ENNUI.

S3

seusible : I ate heartily of one of the most
profusely hospitable suppers, that ever was
prepared for a noble baron, even in the
days when oxen were roasted whole. Then
Ï grew so sleepy, that I was impatient to
be shown to my bed. I was ushered through
another suite of chambers and galleries;
atnd, as I was traversing one of these, a
door of some strange dormitory opened,
and a group of female heads were thrust
out, in the midst of which I could distin-
guish old Ellinor’s face ; but, as I turned
my head, the door closed so quickly, that I
had no time to speak : I only heard the
words “ Blessings on him ! that’s he !”

I was so sleepy, that I rejoiced having
escaped an occasion where I might have
been called upon to speak, yet I was really
grateful to my poor nurse for her blessing.
The state tower, in which, after reiterated
entreaties, Î was at last left alone to repose,
was hung with magnificent, but ancient
tapestry. It was so like a room in a haunted
castle, that if I had not been too much fa-
tigued to think of any thing, I should cer-
tainly have thought of Mrs.RadclifTe. I
am sorry to say, that I have no mysteries.

or even portentous omens to record of this
night ; for the moment that I lay down in
my antiquated bed, I fell into a profound
sleep.

CHAPTER VIL

WHEN I awoke, I thought that I was on
shipboard ; for the first sound I heard was
that of the sea booming against the castle
walls. I arose, looked out of the window
of my bed-chamber, and saw that the whole
prospect bore an air of savage wildness.
As I contemplated the scene, my imagina-
tion was seized with the idea of remoteness
from civilized society : the melancholy
feeling of solitary grandeur took possession
of my soul.

From this feeling I was relieved by the
affectionate countenance of my old nurse,
who at this instant put her head half in at
the door.

“ I only just made bold to look in at the
fire to see did it burn, becaase I lighted it
myself, and would not be blowing of it for
fear of wakening y ou.”

“ Come in, Ellinor, come in,” said I.
“ Come quite m.”

“ I will, since you’ve nobody with you—
that I need be afraid of—” said she, look-
ing round satisfied, when she saw my own
man was not in the room.

“ You need never be afraid of any body,
Ellinor, whilst I am alive,” said I, “ for I
will always protect you. I do not forget
your conduct, when )mu thought I was
dead in the banquetting-room.”

<c Oh I don’t be talking of that: thanks
be to God there was nothing in it. I see
you welL now. Long life to you. Sure you
must have been tired to death last night,
for this morning early you lay so quite,
sleeping like an angel ^ and I could see a
great likeness in yees, to what you were
when you were a child in my arms.”

“ But sit down, sit down, my good Elli-
nor,” said I, “ and let us. talk a little of
your own affairs.”

<c And are not these my own affairs ?”
said she, rather angrily.

ff Certainly; but I mean,, that you must
tell me how you are going on in the world,,
and what I can do to make vou comfort-
able and happy.”

“ There’s one thing would make me
happy,” said she.

“ Name it,” said I.

“ To be let light your fire myself every
morning, and open your shutters, dear.”

I could not help smiling at the simplicity
of the request. I was going to press her to
ask something of more consequence, but
she heard a servant coining along the gal-
lery, and starting from her chair, she ran
and threw herself upon her knees before the
fire, blowing it with her mouth with great
vehemence.

The servant came to let me know that
Mr. McLeod, my agent, was waiting for
me in the breakfast-room.

cc And will I be let light your fire then
every morning ?” said Ellinor eagerly, turn-
ing as she knelt.

<c And welcome,” said I.

“ Then you won’t forget to speak about it
for me,” said she, “ else may be I won’t be
let up BY them English. God bless you,
and don’t forget to speak for me.” “ I will
remember to speak about it,” said I ; but I
went down stairs and forgot.it.

Mr. M‘Leod, whom I found reading the
newspaper in the breakfast-room, seemed
less affected by my presence than any body
I had seen since my arrival. He was a
hard-featured, strong-built, perpendicular
man, with a remarkable quietness of de-
portment: he spoke with deliberate dis-
tinctness, in an accent slightly Scotch ;
and, in speaking, he made use of no gesti-
culation, but held himself surprisingly still.
Xo part of him, but his eyes, moved; and.
they had an expression of slow, but deter-
mined good sense. He was sparing of liis
words, but the few that he used said much,
and went directly to the point. He pressed
for the immediate examination and settle-
ment of his accounts: he enumerated several
things of importance, which he had done for
my service ; but he did this without pre-
tending the slightest attachment to me ; he
mentioned them only as proofs of his having
done his duty to his employer, for which
he neither expected nor would accept of
thanks. He seemed to be cold and upright
in his mind as in his body. I was not in-
fluenced in his favour even by his striking
appearance of plain dealing, so strong was

the general abhorrence of agents, which
Crawley’s treachery had left in my mind»
The excess of credulity, when convinced
of its errour, becomes the extreme of sus-
picion. Persons not habituated to reason
often argue absurdly, because, from parti-
cular instances, they deduce general con-
clusions, and extend the result of their li-
mited experience of individuals indiscrimi-
nately to whole classes. The labour of
thinking was so great to me, that having
once come to a conclusion upon any sub-
ject, I would rather persist in it, right or
wrong, than be at the trouble of going over
the process again, to revise and rectify my
judgement.

Upon this occasion national prejudice
heightened the prepossession, which cir-
cumstances had raised. Mr. M‘Leod was
not only an agent, but a Scotchman; and
I had a notion that all Scotchmen were
crafty : therefore I concluded, that his
blunt manner was assumed, and his plain
dealing but a more refined species of policy.

After breakfast, he laid before me a ge-
neral statement of my affairs; obliged me
to name a day for the examination of his

accounts, and then, without expressing
either mortification or displeasure at the
coldness of iny behaviour, or at my evident
impatience of his presence, he, unmoved
of spirit, rang for his horse, wished me a
good morning, and departed.

By this time my castle-yard was filled
with a crowd of “ great-coated suitors,'*
who were all come to see—could they see mi/
lordship ? or waiting just to sap two ivords
to mp honour. In various lounging atti-
tudes, leaning against the wralls, or pacing
backwards and forwards before the window,
to catch my eye, they, with a patience
passing the patience of courtiers, waited,
hour after hour, the live-long day, for their
turn, or their chance of an audience. I
had promised myself the pleasure of view-
ing my castle this day, and of taking a ride
through my demesne, but that was totally
out of the question. I was no longer a man
with a will of my own, or with time at my
own disposal.

“ Long map you live to reign over us !”
was the signal, that I was now to live, like a
prince, only for the service of my subjects.
IIovv these subjects of mine had contrived

to go on for so many years in my absence,
I was at a loss to conceive ; for, the mo-
ment I was present, it seemed evident that
they could not exist without me.

One had a wife and six childtr, and not
a spot in the wide world to live in, if my
honour did not let him live under me, in
any bit of a skirt of the estate that would
feed a cow.

Another had a brother in jail, who could
not be got out without me.

Another had three lives dropped in a lase
for ever; another wanted a renewal; an-
other a farm; another a house; and one
expected my lard would make his son an ex-
ciseman;. and another that I would make
him a policeman ; and another was racked,
if I did not settle the mearing between him
and Corny Corkran ; and half a hundred
had given in proposials to the agent for
lands that would be out next May; and
half a hundred more came with legends of
traditionary promises from the old lord, my
lordship's father that zvas : and for hours I
was forced to listen to long stories out of the
faccy in which there was such a perplexing
and provoking mixture of truth and fiction.

involved in language so figurative, and
tones so new to my English ears, that, with
my utmost patience and strained attention,
I could comprehend but a very small por-
tion of what was said to me.

Never were my ears so weary any day of
my life as they were this day. I could not
have endured the fatigue, if I had not been
"supported by the agreeable idea of my own
power and consequence; a power seem-
ingly next to despotic. This new stimulus
sustained me for three days that I was kept
a state prisoner in my own castle, by the
crowds who came to do me homage, and to
claim my favour and protection. In vain
every morning was my horse led about sad-
dled and bridled : I never was permitted to
mount. On the fourth morning, when I
felt sure of having dispatched all my tor-
mentors, I was in astonishment and despair
on seeing my levee crowded with a fresh
succession of petitioners. I gave orders to
my people to say that I was going out, and
absolutely could see nobody. I supposed
that they did not understand what my Eng-
lish servants said, for they never stirred
from their posts. On receiving a second

l

message, they acknowledged that they un-
derstood the first; but replied, that they
could wait there till my honour came back
from my ride. With difficulty I mounted
my horse, and escaped from the closing
ranks of my persecutors. At night I gave
directions to have the gates kept shut, and
ordered the porter not to admit any body
at his peril. When I got up, I was de-
lighted to see the coast clear ; but the mo-
ment I went out, lo ! at the outside' of the
gate, the host of besiegers were posted, and
in my lawn, and along the road, and through
the fields, they pursued me ; and when I
forbade them to speak to me when I was
on horseback, the next day I found parties
in ambuscade, who laid wait for me in si-
lence, with their hats off, bowing and bow-
ing, till I could not refrain from saying*
u Well, my good friend, what do you stand
bowing there for?” Then I was fairly pri-
soner, and held by the bridle for an hour.

In short, I found that I was now placed
in a situation, where I could hope neither
for privacy nor leisure; but I had the joys
of power: my rising passion for which
would certainly have been extinguished in

a short time by my habitual indolence, if it
had not been kept alive by jealousy of Mr.
M‘Leod.

One day, when I refused to hear an im-
portunate tenant, and declared that I had
been persecuted with petitioners ever since
my arrival, and that I was absolutely tired
to death, the man answered—“ True, for
ye, my lard ; and it’s a shame to be trou-
bling you this way. Then, may be it’s to
Mr. M‘Leod I'll go ? Sure the agent will
do as well, and no more about it. Mr.
McLeod will do every thing the same way
as usual.”

“ Mr. M‘Leod will do every thing,9 said
I hastily: u no, by no means.”

“ Who will we speak to then ?” said the
man.

“ To myself,” said I, with as haughty a
tone as Lewis XIV. could have assumed,
when he announced to his court his reso-
lution to be his own minister. After this
intrepid declaration to act for myself, I
£ould not yield to my habitual laziness. So
much had my pride been hurt, as well as
my other feelings, by Captain Crawley>

conduct, that I determined to show the
world I was not to be duped a second time
by an agent.

When, on the day appointed, Mr.
M‘Leod came to settle accounts with me,
I, with an air of self-important capability,
as if I had been all my life used to look into
my own affairs, sat down to inspect the
papers; and, incredible as it may appear,
I went through the whole at a sitting, with-
out a single yawn ; and, for a man, who
never before had looked into an account, I
understood the nature of debtor and creditor
wonderfully well : but, with my utmost de-
sire to evince my arithmetical sagacity, I
could not detect the slightest errour in the
accounts; and it was evident, that Mr.
M£Leod was not Captain Crawley; yet,
rather than believe that he could be both
an agent and an honest man, I concluded,
that if he did not cheat me out of my mo-
ney, his aim was to cheat me out of power;
and fancying that he wished to be a man of
influence and consequence in the county, I«
transferred to him instantly the feelings that
were passing in my own mind, and took it

for granted, that he must be actuated by a
love of power in every thing that he did ap-
parently for my service.

About this time I remember being much
disturbed in my mind, by a letter which
Mr. McLeod received in my presence, and
of which he read to me only a part : I never
rested till I saw the whole. The epistle
proved well worth the trouble of decipher-
ing: it related merely to the paving of my
chicken-yard. Like the King of Prussia*,
who was said to be so jealous of power,
that he wanted to regulate all the mouse-
traps in his dominions, I soon engrossed the
management of a perplexing multiplicity of
minute insignificant details. Alas î I dis-
covered, to my cost, that trouble is the in-
separable attendant upon power : and many
times, in the course of the first ten days of
my reign, I was ready to give up my dig-
nity from excessive fatigue.

* Mirabeau—Secret Memoirs.

CHAPTER VIII.

Early one morning, after having passed a
feverish night, tortured in my dreams by the
voices and faces of the people who had sur-
rounded me the preceding day, I was wa-
kened by the noise of somebody lighting
my fire. I thought it was Ellinor, and the
idea of the disinterested affection of this
poor woman came full into my mind, con-
trasted in the strongest manner with the re-
collection of the selfish encroaching people
by whom, of late, I had been worried.

“ How do you do, my good Ellinor r”
said I : “ I have not seen any thing of you
this week past.”

“ It’s not Ellinor at all, my lord,” said a
new voice.

“ And why so ? Why does not Ellinor
light my fire ?”

“ Myself does not know, my lard.” .

*c Go for her directly.”

“ She’s gone home these three days, my
lard.”

“ Gone ! is she sick ?”

“ Not as I know o?i, my lard. Myself
does not know what ailed her, except she
would be Jealous of my lighting the fire.
But I can’t say what ailed her ; for she
went away without a word good or bad,
when she seen me lighting this fire, which
I did by the housekeeper’s orders.”

I now recollected poor Ellinor’s request,
and reproached myself for having neglected
to fulfil my promise, upon an affair which,
however trifling in itself, appeared of con-
sequence to her. In the course of my
morning’s ride I determined to call upon
her at her own house, and make my apo-
logies: but first I satisfied my curiosity
about a prodigious number of parks and
towns which I had heard of upon my estate.
Many a ragged man had come to me, with
the modest request that I would let him
one of the parks near the town. The horse-
park, the deer-park, the cow-park, were
not quite sufficient to answer the ideas I
had attached to the word park : but I was

quite astonished and mortified when I be-
held the bits and corners of land near the
town of Glenthorn, on which these high-
sounding titles had been bestowed :—-just
what would feed a cow is sufficient in Ire-
land to constitute a park.

When I heard the names of above a hun-
dred towns on the Glenthorn estate, I had
an exalted idea of my own territories ; and
I was impatient to make a progress through
my dominions: but, upon visiting a few of
these places, my curiosity was satisfied.
Two or three cabins gathered together were
sufficient to constitute a town, and the land
adjoining thereto is called a town-land.
The denominations of these town-lands hav-
ing continued from generation to genera-
tion, according to ancient surveys of Ire-
land, it is sufficient to show the boundaries
of a town-land, to prove that there must be
a town, and a tradition of a town continues
to be satisfactory, even when only a single
cabin remains. I turned my horse’s head
away in disgust from one of these tradition-
ary towns, and desired a boy to show me
the Way to Ellinor O’Donoghoe’s house.

cc So I will, plase your honour, my lard ;
sure I’ve a right to know, for she’s my own
mother.”

The boy, or, as he was called, the gos-
soon, ran across some fields where there was
abundance of fern and of rabbits. The rab-
bits, sitting quietly at the entrance of their
holes, seemed to consider themselves as pro-
prietors of the soil, and me and my horse
as intruders. The boy apologized for the
number of rabbit holes on this part of the
estate : “ It would not be so, my lard, if I
had a gun allowed me by the gamekeeper,
which he would give me, if he knew it
would be plasing to your honour.” The
ingenuity, with which even the young boys
can introduce their requests in a favourable
moment, sometimes provoked me, and
sometimes excited my admiration. This
boy made his just at the time he was roll-
ing out of my way a car that stopped a gap
in the hedge, and he was so hot and out of
breath with running in my service, that I
could not refuse him a token to the game-
keeper that he might get a gun as soon as I
understood what it meant.

We came to Ellinor’s house, a wretched-

looking, low, mud-walled cabin ; at one end
it was propped by a buttress of loose stones,
upon which stood a goat reared on his hind
legs, to browze on the grass that grew on
the housetop. A dunghill was before the
only window, at the other end of the house,
and close to the door was a puddle of the
dirtiest of dirty water, in which ducks were
dabbling. At my approach there came
out of the cabin, a pig, a calf, a lamb, a
kid, and two geese, all with their legs tied ;
followed by turke3'S, cocks, hens, chickens,
a dog, a cat, a kitten, a beggar-man, a beg-
gar-woman, with a pipe in her mouth ;
children innumerable, and a stout girl, with
a pitchfork in her hand ; altogether more
than I, looking down upon the roof as I sat
on horseback, and measuring the super-
ficies with my eye, could have possibly sup-
posed the mansion capable of containing.
—I asked if Ellinor O’Donoghoe was at
home? but the dog barked, the geese
cackled, the turkeys gobbled, and the beg-
gars begged with one accord, so loudly,
that there was no chance of my being
heard. When the girl had at last succeeded
in appeasing them all with her pitchfork,

she answered, that Ellinor O’Donoghoe was
at home, but that she was out with the po-
tatoes ; and she ran to fetch her, after call-
ing to the boys, who zvas within in the room
smoking, to come out to his honour. As
soon as they had crouched under the door,
>and were able to stand upright, they wel-
comed me with a very good grace, and
were proud to see me in the kingdom. I
asked if they were all Ellinor’s sons.

“ All entirely,” was the first answer.

“ Not one but one,” was the second
answer. The third made the other two in-
telligible.

“ Plase your honour, we are all her sons-
in-law, except myself, who am her lawful
son.”

“ Then you are my foster-brother ?”

“ No, plase your honour, it’s not me, but
my brother, and he’s riot in it.”

“ Not in it ?”

“ No, plase your honour, becaase he’s
in the forge up abow.”

“ Abow!” said I3 cc what does he
mean ?”

“ Sure he’s the blacksmith, my lard.”
cc And what are you ?”

“ I’m Ody, plase your honour •” the short
for Owen.

“ And what is your trade ?”

“ Trade, plase your honour, I was bred
to none, more than another ; but expects,
only that my mother’s not willing to part
me, to go into the militia next month j and
I’m sure she’d let me, if your honour’s lord-
ship would spake a word to the colonel, to
see to get me made a sergeant immadi-
atehj” "

As Ody made his request, all his com-
panions came forward in sign of sympathy,
and closed round my horse’s head to make
me sinsible of their expectations 5 but at this
instant Ellinor came up, her old face colour-
ing all over with joy when she saw me.

“ So, Ellinor,” said I,c< you were affront-
ed, I hear, and left the castle in anger ?”

“ In anger! And if I did, more shame
for me—but anger does not last long with
me any way ; and against you, my lord,
dear how could it ? Oh, think how good he
is, coming to see me in such a poor place !”
“ I will make it a better place for you,
Ellinor,” said I. Far from being eager to
obtain promises, she still replied, that “ all

was* good enough for her.” I desired that
she would come and live with me at the
castle, till a better house than her present
habitation could be built for her; but she
seemed to prefer this hovel. I assured her
that she should be permitted to light my
fire.

“ Oh it’s better for me not I” said she ;
“ better keep out of the way. I could not
be asy if I got any one ill-will.”

I assured her that she should be at liberty
to do just as she liked ; and whilst I rode
home I was planning a pretty cottage for
her near the porters lodge. I was pleased
with myself for my gratitude to this poor
woman. Before I slept, I actually wrote a
letter, which obtained for Ody the honour
of being made a sergeant in the-------mi-

litia; and Ellinor, dazzled by this military
glory, was satisfied that he should leave
home, though he was her favourite.

“ Well, let him leave me then,” said she;
“ I won’t stand in his light. I never thought
of my living to see Ody a sergeant. Now,
Ody, have done being wild, honey-dear,
and be a credit to your family, and to his
honour’s commendation—God bless him for

ever for it! From the very first I knew it
was he that had the kind heart.”

I am not sure, that it was a very good
action to get a man made a sergeant, of
whom I knew nothing, but that he was son
to my nurse. Self-complacency, however,
cherished my first indistinct feelings of be-
nevolence. Though not much accustomed
to reflect upon my own sensations, I think
I remember, at this period, suspecting that
the feeling of benevolence is a greater plea-
sure than the possession of barouches, and
horses, and castles, and parks—greater even
than the possession of power. Of this last
truth, however, I had not as yet a perfectly
clear conception. Even in my benevolence
I was as impatient and unreasonable as a
child. Money, I thought, had the power
of Aladdin’s lamp, to procure with magical
celerity the gratification of my wishes. I
expected that a cottage for Ellinor should
rise out of the earth at my command. But
the slaves of Aladdin’s lamp were not Irish-
men. The delays, and difficulties, and
blunders, in the execution of my orders,
provoked me beyond measure ; and it would
have been difficult for a cool spectator to

decide, whether I or my workmen were most
in fault; they for their dilatory habits, or I
lor my impatient temper.

“ Well, plase your honour, when the
pratees are set, and the turf cut, we ll fall-io
at Ellinor’s house.”

“ Confound the potatoes and the turf \
you must fall-to, as you call it, directly.”

“ Is it without the lime, and plase your
honour ? Sure that same is not drawn yet,
nor the stones quarried, since it is of stone
it will be—nor the foundations itself dug,
and the horses were all putting out dung.”
Then after the bog and the potatoes came
funerals and holidays innumerable. The
masons were idle one week waiting for the
mortar, and the mortar another week wait-
ing for the stones, and then they wrere at a
stand for the carpenter when they came to
the door-case, and the carpenter was look-
ing for the sawyer, and the sawyer was gone
to have the saw mended. Then there was
a stop again at the windowT-sills for the
stone-cutter, and he was at the quarter-
sessions, processing his brother for tin and
tin pence, hay-money. And when, in spite of
all delays and obstacles, the walls reached

their destined height, the roof was a new
plague; the carpenter, the slater, and the
nailer, were all at variance, and I cannot
tell which was the most provoking rogne of
the three. At last, however, the house was
roofed and slated : then I would not wait
till the walls were dry before I plastered
and papered and furnished it. I fitted it
up in the most elegant style of English cot-
tages, for I was determined that Ellinor’s
habitation should be such as had never
been seen in this part of the world. The
day when it was finished, and when I gave
possession of it to Ellinor, paid me for all
my trouble ; I tasted a species of pleasure
that was new to me, and which was the
sweeter from having been earned with some
difficulty. And now, when I saw a vast
number of my tenants assembled at a rural
feast, which I gave on Ellinor’s installation,
my benevolence enlarged, even beyond the
possibility of its gratification, and I wished
to make all my dependants happy, provided
I could accomplish it without much trou-
ble. The method of doing good, which
seemed to require the least exertion, and
which I, therefore, most willingly practised.

was giving away money. I did not wait to
inquire, much less to examine into the me-
rits of the claimants ; but, without selecting
proper objects, I relieved myself from the
uneasy feeling of pity, by indiscriminate
donations to objects apparently the most
miserable.

I was quite angry with Mr. M‘Leod, my
agent; and considered him as a selfish,
hard-hearted miser, because he did not seem
to sympathize with me, or to applaud my
generosity. I was so much irritated by his
cold silence, that I could not forbear press-
ing him to say something.

<c I doubt, then,” said he, “ since you de-
sire me to speak my mind, my lord, I doubt
whether the best way of encouraging the
industrious, is to give premiums to the
idle.”

<c But, idle or not, these poor wretches
are so miserable, that I cannot refuse to
give them something; and, surely, when
one can do it so easily, it is right to relieve
misery. Is it not?”

“ Undoubtedly, my lord ; but the diffi-
culty is to relieve present misery, without
creating more in future. Pity for one class

of beings sometimes makes us cruel to
others. I am told that there are some In-
dian J3rah mins so very compassionate, that
they hire beggars to let fleas feed upon
them ; I doubt whether it might not be bet-
ter to let the fleas starve.”

I did not in the least understand what
Mr. McLeod meant ; but I was soon made
to comprehend it, by crowds of eloquent
beggars, who soon surrounded me : many
who had been resolutely struggling with
their difficulties, slackened their exertions,
and left their labour for the easier trade of
imposing upon my credulity. The money I
had;bestowed was wasted at the dram-shop,
ov it became the subject of family quarrels ;
and those whom I had relieved, returned to
my honoury with fresh and insatiable expec-
tations. All this time my industrious te-
nants grumbled, because no encouragement
was given to them 5 and, looking upon me
as* a weak good-natured fool, they com-
bined . in a resolution to ask me for long
leases, or reduction of rent.

,The rhetoric of my tenants succeeded, in
some instances \ and again, I was mortified
by Mr. M‘Leod’s silence. I was too proud

to ask his opinion. I ordered, and was
obeyed. A few leases for long terms were
signed and sealed ; and when I had thus
my own way completely, I could not refrain
from recurring to Mr. McLeod’s opinion.

<c I doubt, my lord,” said he, “ whether
this measure may be as advantageous as
you hope. These fellows, these middle
men, will underset the land, and live in idle-
ness, whilst they rack a parcel of wretched
under-tenants.”

“ But they said they would keep the land
in their own hands, and improve it; and that
the reason why they could not afford to im-
prove before was, that they had not long
leases.”

“ It may be doubted whether long leases
alone will make improving tenants ; for in
the next county to us there are many farms
of the dowager Lady Ormsby’s land, let at
ten shillings an acre, and her tenantry are
beggars : and the land now, at the end of
the leases, is worn out, and worse than at
their commencement.”

I wras weary listening to this cold reason-
ing, and resolved to apply no more for ex-
planations to Mr. M‘Leod; yet I did not

long keep this resolution: infirm of pur-
pose, I wanted the support of his approba-
tion, at the very time I was jealous of his
interference.

At one time I had a mind to raise the
wages of labour; but Mr. McLeod said—
€e It might be doubted whether the people
would not work less, when they could with
less work have money enough to support
them.,,

I was puzzled, and then I had a mind to
lower the wages of labour, to force them
to work or starve—Still, provoking Mr.
M‘Leod said — “ It might be doubted
whether it would not be better to leave
them alone.”

I gave marriage portions to the daugh-
ters of my tenants, and rewards to those
who had children ; for I had always heard
that legislators should encourage popula-
tion.

Still Mr. M‘Leod hesitated to approve ;
he observed, <c that my estate was so po-
pulous, that the complaint in each family
was, that they had not land for the sons.
It might be doubted whether, if a fam*.
could support but ten people, it were wise

to encourage the birth of twenty. It might
be doubted whether it were not better for
ten to live, and be well fed, than for twenty
to be bom, and to be half-starved.”

To encourage manufactures in my town
of Glenthorn, I proposed putting a clause
in my leases, compelling my tenants to
buy stuffs and linens manufactured at
Glenthorn, and no where else. Stubborn
McLeod, as usual, began with—

' “ I doubt whether that will not encou^
rage the manufacturers at Glenthorn to
make bad stuffs and bad linen, since they
are sure of a sale, and without danger of
competition.”

At all events, I thought my tenants
would grow rich and independent, if they
made every thing at home that they want-
ad : yet Mr. MeLeod perplexed me by his
“ Doubt whether it would not be better
for a man to buy shoes, if he could buy
them cheaper than he could make them.’*
He added something about the division of
labour, and Smith’s Wealth of Nations. To
which I could only answer—Smith’s a
Scotchman.

I cannot express how much I dreaded

Mr. M‘Leod’s I doubt—and—It may be
doubted.

From the pain of cloubt, and the labour
of thought, I was soon most agreeably re-
prieved by the company of a Mr. Hard-
castle, whose visits I constantly encouraged
by a most gracious reception. Mr. Hard-
castle was the agent of the dowager Lady
Ormsby, who had a large estate in my
neighbourhood:	he was the very re-

verse of my Mr. McLeod in his deportment
and conversation. Talkative, self-suffi-
cient, peremptory, he seemed not to know
what it was to doubt ; he considered doubt
as a proof of ignorance, imbecility, or cow-
ardice. “ Can any man doubt?” was his
usual beginning. On every subject of hu-
man knowledge, taste, morals, politics, eco-
nomy, legislation; on all affairs, civil, mi-
litary, or ecclesiastical, he decided at once
in the most confident tone. Yet he “ ne-
ver read, not he !” he had nothing to do
with books ; he consulted only his own
eyes and ears, and appealed only to com-
mon sense. As to theory, he had no opi-
nion of theory ; for his part, he only pre-
tended to understand practice and expe-

rience—and his practice was confined
steadily to his own practice, and his expe-
rience uniformly to what he had tried at
New-town-Hardcastle.

At first I thought him a mighty clever **
man, and I really rejoiced to see my doubter
silenced. After dinner, when he had fi-
nished speaking in his decisive manner, I
used frequently to back him with a—Very
true—very fair—very clear—though I un-
derstood what he said, as little as he did
himself; but it was an ease to my mind to
have a disputed point settled—and I filled
my glass with an air of triumph, whilst
M‘Leod never contradicted my assertions,
or controverted Mr. Hardcastle’s argu-
ments. There was still an air of content
and quiet self-satisfaction in M‘Leod’s very
silence, which surprised and vexed me.

One day, when Hardcastle was laying
down the law upon several subjects, in his
usual dictatorial manner, telling us how he
managed his people, and what order he
kept them in, I was determined that
M‘Leod should not enjoy the security of
his silence, and I urged him to give us his

general opinion, as to the means of improv-
ing the poor people in Ireland.

“ I doubt,” said M‘Leod, “ whether
any thing effectual can be done, till they
have a better education.”

<c Education!—Pshaw!—There it is
now; these book-men,” cried Hardcastle—
“ Why, my dear sir, can any man alive,
who knows this country, doubt that the
common people have already too much
education, as it is called—a vast deal too
much ? Too many of them know how to
read, and write, and cipher, which I pre-
sume is all you mean by education.”

“ Not entirely,” said McLeod—“ a*
good education comprehends something
more.”

“ The more the worse,” interrupted
Hardcastle. The more they know, the
worse they are, sir, depend on that ; I know
the people of this country, sir ; I have a
good right to know them, sir, being born
amongst them, and bred amongst them ; so
I think I may speak with some confidence
on these matters. And I give it as my
decided humble opinion, founded on irre-

fragable experience, which is what I al-
ways build upon, that the way to ruin the
poor of Ireland would be to educate them,
sir. Look at the poor scholars, as they
call themselves; and what are they? a
parcel of young vagabonds in rags, with a
book under their arm instead of a spade or
a shovel, sir. And what comes of this?
that they grow up the worst-disposed, and
the most troublesome seditious rascals in the
community. I allow none of them about
New-town-Hardcastle ; none — banished
them all. Useless vagrants—hornets—
vipers, sir: and show me a quieter, better-
managed set of people, than I have made of
mine. I go upon experience, sir; and
that’s the only thing to go upon ; and I’ll
go no farther than New-town-Hardcastle :
if that won’t bring conviction home to you,
nothing will.”

cc I never was at New-town-IIardcastle,”
said McLeod drily.

“ Well, sir, I hope it will not be the
case long. But in the mean time, my good
sir, do give me leave to put it to your own
common sense, what can reading or writing
do for a poor man, unless he is to be a

bailiff or an exciseman ? and you know all
men can’t expect to be bailiffs or excise-
men. Can all the book-learning in the
world, sir, dig a poor man’s potatoes for
him, or plough his land, or cut his turf?
Then, sir, in this country, where’s the ad-
vantages of education, I humbly ask ? No,
sir, no, trust me—keep the Irish common
people ignorant, and you keep ’em quiet;
and that’s the only way with them ; for they
are too quick and smart as it is naturally.
Teach them to read and write, and it’s just
adding fuel to fire—fire to gunpowder, sir.
Teach them any thing, and directly you
set them up : now, it’s our business to keep
them down, unless, sir, you’d wish to have
your throat cut. Education, sir ; Lord
bless your soul, sir ! they have a great deal
too much ; they know too much already,
which makes them so refractory to the
laws, and so idle. I will go no farther than
New-town-Hardcastle, to prove all this.
So, my good sir,” concluded he, triumph-
antly, “ education, I grant you, is ne-
cessary for the rich ; but tell me, if you can,
what’s the use of education to the poor ?”

“ Much the same, I apprehend, as to

the rich,” answered McLeod. “ The use
of education, as I understand it, is to teach
men to see clearly, and to follow steadily,
their real interests. All morality, you
know, is comprised in this definition;
and—”

“ Very true, sir; but all this can never
apply to the poor in Ireland.”
c* Why, sir, are they not men ?

“ Men, to be sure; but not like men in
Scotland. The Irish know nothing of their
interests; and as to morality, that’s out of
the question: they know nothing* about it,
my dear sir.”

“ That is the very thing of which I com-
plain,” said M‘Leod. “ They know no-
thing, because they have been taught no-
thing.”

“ They cannot be taught, sir.”

“ Did you ever try ?”

“ I did, sir, no later than last week. A
fellow that I caught stealing my turf, in-
stead of sending him to jail, I said to him,
with a great deal of lenity, My honest fel-
low, did you never hear of the eighth com-
mandment, c Thou shalt not steal ?’ He
confessed he had ; but did not know it was

the eighth. I showed it to him, and counted
it to him myself ; and set him, for a punish-
ment, to get his whole catechism. Well,
sir, the next week I found him stealing my
turf again I and when I caught him by the
wrist in the fact, he said, it was because
the priest would not let him learn the cate-
chism I gave him, because it was a pro-
testant one. Now you see, sir, there’s a
bar for ever to all education.”

Mr. M‘Leod smiled, said something
about time and patience, and observed,
<( that one experiment was not conclusive
against a whole nation.” Any thing like a
general argument, Mr. Hardcastle could
not comprehend. He knew every blade
of grass within the reach of his tether, but
could not reach an inch beyond. Any
thing like an appeal to benevolent feelings
was lost upon him ; for he was so frank in
his selfishness, that he did not even pretend
to be generous.—By sundry self-compla-
cent notions he showed, whilst his adver-
sary spoke, that he disdained to listen al-
most as much as to read : but, as soon as
M‘Leod paused, he said—

“ What yQp observe, sir, may possibly

be very true; but I have made up my
mind.” Then he went over and over again
his assertions, in a louder and a louder
voice : ending with a tone of interrogation
that seemed to set all answer at defiance.

<c What have you to answer to me now,
sir ? Can any man alive doubt this, sir?”

M‘Leod was perfectly silent. The com-
pany broke up ; and, as we were going out
of the room, I maliciously asked MfLeod,
why he, who could say so much in his own
defence, had suffered himself to be so com-
pletely silenced. He answered me, in his
low deliberate voice, in the words of Mo-
lière—u Qu’est-ce que la raison avec un filet
de voix contre une gueule comme celle-là ?*
At some other time,” added Mr. M’Leod,
“ my sentiments shall be at your lordship’s
disposal.”

Indolent persons love positive people
when they are of their own opinion; be*
cause they are saved the trouble of deve-
loping their thoughts, or supporting their
assertions : but the moment the positive
differs in sentiment from the indolent man,
there is an end of the friendship. The in-
dolent man then hates his pertinacious ad-

versary as much as he loved his sturdy
friend. So it happened between Mr. Hard-
castle and me. This gentleman was a pro-
digious favourite with me, so long as his
opinions were not in opposition to my own ;
but an accident happened, which brought
his love of power and mine into direct com-
petition, and then I found his peremptory
modeof reasoning and his ignorance absurd
and insufferable.

Before I can do justice to my part of this
quarrel, I must explain the cause of the
interest which I took in behalf of the per-
sons aggrieved. During the time that my
first hot fit of benevolence was on me, I was
riding home one evening after dining with
Mr. Flardcastle, and I was struck with the
sight of a cabin, more wretched than any I
had ever before beheld : the feeble light of
a single rush candle through the window
revealed its internal misery.

<c Does any body live in that hovel ?”
said I.

“ Ay sure does there: the Noonans,
please your honour,” replied a man on the
road. Noonans ! I recollected the name to
be that of the pugilist, who had died in con-

sequence of the combat at which I had
been present in London ; who had, with
his dying breath, besought me to convey
his only half-guinea, and his silk handker-
chief, to his poor father and sister. I
alighted from my horse,’asking the man, at
the same time, if the son of this Noonan
had not died in England.

“ He had, sir, a son in England, Mick
Noonan, who used to send him odd guineas,
T mind, and was a good lad to his father,
though wild ; and there’s been no account
of him at all at all this long while : but the
old man has another boy, a sober lad, who’s
abroad with the army m the East Indies ;
and it’s he that is the hope of the family.
And there’s the father—and old as he is,
and poor, and a cripple, I’d engage there
is not a happier man in the three counties
at this very time speaking: for it is just,
now I seen young Jemmy Riley, the daugh-
ter’s bachelor, go by with a letter. What
news ? says I. Great news ! says he : a
letter from Tom Noonan to his father; and
I’m going in to read it for him.”

By the time my voluble informant had
come to this period, I had reached the cabin

door. Who could have expected to see
smiles, and hear exclamations of joy, under
such a roof?

I saw the father, with his hands clasped
in ecstasy, and looking up to Heaven, with
the strong expression of delight in his aged
countenance. I saw every line of his face ;
for the light of the candle was full upon it.
The daughter, a beautiful girl, kneeling be-
side him, held the light.for the young man,
who was reading her brother’s letter. I
was sorry to interrupt them.

“ Your honour’s kindly welcome,” said
the old man, making an attempt to rise.

“ Pray don’t let me disturb you.”

“It was only a letter from a boy of mine
that’s over the seas we wTas reading,” said
the old man. “ A better boy to an ould
father, that’s good for nothing now in this
world, never was, plase your honour. See
what he has sent me: a draught here for
ten guineas, out of the little pay he has.
God for ever bless him—as he surely will.”
After a few minutes’ conversation, the old
man’s heart was so much opened towards
me, that he talked as freely as if he had
known me for years. I led to the subject

of his other soil Michael, who was men-
tioned in the letter as a wild chap. “ Ah !
your honour, that’s what lies heaviest on
my heart, and will to my dying day, that
Mick, before he died, which they say he
did surely a twelvemonth ago, over there in
England, never so much as sent me one
line, good or bad, or his sister a token to
remember him by even !”

“ Had he but sent us the least bit of a
word, or the least token in life, I had been
content,” said the sister, wiping her eyes :
“ we don’t so much as know how he died.”
I took this moment to relate the circum-
stances of Michael Noonan’s death : and
when I told them of his dying request about
the half-guinea and the silk handkerchief,
they were all so much touched, that they
utterly forgot the ten-guinea draught, which
I saw on the ground, in the dirt, under the
old man’s feet, whilst he contemplated the
half-guinea which his poor Michael had sent
him: repeating, cc Poor fellow ! poor fel-
low ! ’twas all he had in the world. God
bless him !—Poor Michael ! he was a wild
chap ! but none better to his parents than he
while the life -was in him. Poor Alichael I”

In no country have I found such strong
instances of filial affection as in Ireland.
Let the sons go where they may, let what
will befall them, they never forget their pa-
rents at home : they write to them con-
stantly the most affectionate letters, and
send them a share of whatever they earn.

When I asked the daughter of this Noo-
nan, why she had not married ? the old man
answered, “ That’s her own fault—if it be a
fault to abide by an old father. She wastes
her youth here, in the way your honour sees,
tending him who has none other to mind
him.”

“ Oh ! let alone that” said the girl, with
a cheerful smile, we be too poor to think
of marrying yet, by a great deal; so, father
dear, you’re no hindrance any way. For
don’t I know, and doesn’t Jemmy there
know, that it’s a sin and a shame, as my
mother used to say, for them that have no-
thing to marry and set up house-keeping,
like the rogue that ruined my father?”

“ That’s true,” said the young man, with
a heavy sigh : “ but times will mend, or
we’ll strive and mend them, with the bless-
ing of God.”

I left this miserable hut in admiration of
the generosity of its inhabitants. I desired
the girl to corne to Glenthorn Castle the
next day, that I might give her the silk
handkerchief which her poor brother had
sent her. The more I inquired into the cir-
cumstances of this family, the more cause
I found for pity and approbation. The old
man had been a good farmer in his day, as
the traditions of the aged, and the memo-
ries of the young, were ready to witness ;
but he was unfortunately joined in coparU
nership with a drunken rogue, who ran
away, and left an arrear of rent, which
ruined Noonan. Mr. Hardcastle, the agent,
called upon him to pay it, and sold all that
the old man possessed y and this being in-
sufficient to discharge the debt, he was
forced to give up his farm, and retire, with
his daughter, to this hovel $ and soon after-
wards he lost the use of his side by a para-
lytic stroke.

I was so much pleased with the goodness
of these poor people, that, in despite of my
indolent disposition, I bestirred myself the
very next day to find a better habitation for
them on my own estate. I settled them,

infinitely to their satisfaction, in a small
farm 3 and the girl married her lover, who
undertook to manage the farm for the old
man. To my utter surprise I found, that
Mr. Ilardcastle was affronted by the part I
took in this affair. He complained that Ï
had behaved in a very uugentlemanlike
manner, and had spirited away the tenants
from Lady Ormsby’s estate, against the re-
gulation which he had laid down for all the
tenants not to emigrate from the estate.
Jemmy Riley, it seems, was one of the cot-
ters on the Ormsby estate, a circumstance
with which I was unacquainted ; indeed I
scarcely at that time understood what was
meant by a cotter. Mr. Hardcastle’s com-
plaint, in matter and manner, was unintel-
ligible to me; but I was quite content to
leave off visiting him, as he left off visiting
me—but here the matter did not stop. This
over-wise and over-busy gentleman took
upon him, amongst other offices, the regu-
lation of the markets in the town of Orms-
by; and as he apprehended, for reasons
best and only known to himself, a year of
scarcity, he thought fit to keep down the
price of oats and potatoes. He wrould ah

low none to be sold in the market of Orms-
by, but at the price which he stipulated.
The poor people grumbled, and to remedy
the injustice, made private bargains with
each other, He had information of this,
and seized the corn that was selling above
the price he had fixed. Young Riley,
Noonan’s son-in-law, came to me to com-
plain, that his little oats teas seized and
detained. I remonstrated—Hard castle re-
sented the appeal to me, and bid him wait
and be damned. The young man, who
was rather of a hasty temper, and who did
not much like either to Avait or be damned,
seized his own oats, and was marching off,
when they were recaptured by Hardcastle’s
bailiff, whom young Riley knocked down ;
and who, as soon as he got up again, went
straight and swore examinations against Ri*
ley. Then I was offended, as I had a right
to be, by the custom of the country, with
the magistrate who took an examination
against my tenant without writing first to
me. Then there was a race between the
examinations of my justice of peace and his
justice of peace. My indolence was con-
quered by my love of power : I supported

the contest : the affair came before our
grand jury : I conquered, and Mr. Ilard-
castle was ever after, of course, my enemy.
To English ears the possessive pronouns my
and his may sound extraordinary, prefixed
to a justice of peace; but, in many parts of
Ireland, this language is perfectly correct.
A great man talks of making a justice of
the peace with perfect confidence : a very
great man talks with as much certainty of
making a sheriff ; and a sheriff makes the
jury ; and the jury makes the law. We
must not forget, however, that, in England,
during the reign of Elizabeth, a member of
parliament defined a justice of peace to be
<c an animal who, for half a dozen chickens,
will dispense with half a dozen penal sta-
tutes.” Time is necessary to enforce the
sanctions of legislation and civilization—
But I am anticipating reflections, which I
made at a much later period of my life. To
return to my history.

My benevolence was soon checked by
slight disappointments. Ellinor’s cottage,
which I had taken so much pains to build,
became a source of mortification to me.
One day I found my old nurse sitting at her

wheel, in the midst of the wreck and litter
of ail sorts of household furniture, singing
her favourite song of

u There was a lady lov’d a swine,

“ Honey ! says she,

“ Til give ye a silver trough.
t( Hunk / says he !”

Ellinor seemed, alas ! to have as little
taste for the luxuries with which I had pro-
vided her, as the pig had for the silver
trough. What I called conveniences, were
to her incumbrances : she had not been
used to them; she was put out of her way ;
and it was a daily torment to one of her
habits, to keep her house clean and neat.

There may be, as some philosophers as-
sure us that there is, an innate love of order
in the human mind ; but of this instinctive
principle my poor Éllinor was totally desti-
tute. Her ornamented farm-house became,
in a v/onderfully short time, a scene of dirt,
rubbish, and confusion. There was a par-
tition between two rooms, which had been
built with turf or peat, instead of bricks, by
the wise economy I had employed. Of
course, this was pulled down to get at the

turf. The stairs also were pulled down and
burned, though there was no scarcity of
firing. As the walls were plastered and
papered before they were quite diy, the
paper grew mouldy, and the plaster fell off.
In the hurry of finishing, some of the wood-
work had but one coat of paint. In Ire-
land they have not faith in the excellent
Dutch proverb, cc Paint costs nothing.” I
could not get my workmen to give a second
coat of paint to any of the sashes, and the
wood decayed : divers panes of glass in the
windows were broken, and their places filled
up with shoes, an old hat, or a bundle of
rags. Some of the slates were blown off
one windy night : the slater lived ten miles
off, and before the slates were replaced, the
rain came in, and Ellinor was forced to
make a bed-chamber of the parlour, and
then of the kitchen, retreating from corner
to corner as the rain pursued, till, at last,
when fc it would come every way upon her
bed,” she petitioned me to let her take the
slates off and thatch the house ; for a slated
house, she said, was never so warm as a
tatched cabin ; and as there was no smoke,
she was kilt with the cowld.

In my life I never felt so angry. I was
ten times more angry than when Crawley
ran away with my wife. In a paroxysm of
passion, I reproached Ellinor with being a
savage, an Irishwoman, and aii ungrateful
fool.

“ Savage I am, for any thing I know; and
fool I am, that’s certain ; but ungrateful I
am not,” said she, bursting into tears. She
went home and took to her bed ; and the
next thing I heard from her son was, f< that
she "was lying in the rheumatism, which had
kept her awake many a long night, before
she would come to complain to my honour
of the house, in dread that I should blame
myself for sending of her into it afore it was
dry.”

The rheumatism reconciled me immedi-
ately to Ellinor; I let her take her own
way, and thatch the house, and have as
much smoke as she pleased, and she reco-
vered. But I did not entirely recover my
desire to do good to my poor tenants. Af-
ter forming, in the first enthusiasm of my
benevolence, princely schemes for their ad-
vantage, my ardour was damped, and my

zeal discouraged, by a few slight disap-
pointments.

I did not consider, that there is often,
amongst uncultivated people, a mixture of
obstinate and lazy content, which makes
them despise the luxuries of their richer
neighbours; like those mountaineers, who,
proud of their own hard fare*, out of a
singular species of contempt, call the in-
habitants of the plains ma?tge-?'olis> “ eaters
of roast meat.” I did not consider, that it
must take time to change local and national
habits and prejudices; and that it is neces-
sary to raise a taste for comforts, before
they can be properly enjoyed.

In the pettishness of my disappointment,
I decided, that it was in vain to attempt to
improve or civilize such people as the Irish.
I did not recollect, perhaps at that time I
did not know, that even in the days of the
great Queen Elizabeth, “ the greatest part
of the buildings in the cities and good towns

* See Philosophical Transactions, vol. Ixvii. part 2,
Sir George Shuckburgh’s observations to ascertain the
height of mountains—for a full account of the cabin of
a couple of Alpine shepherdesses.

of England consisted only of timber, cast
over with thick clay to keep out the wind.
The new houses of the nobility were indeed
either of brick or stone ; and glass windows
were then beginning to be used in Eng-
land* and clean rushes were strewed over
the dirty floors of the royal palace. In the
impatience of my zeal for improvement, I
expected to do the Work of two hundred
years in a few months : and because I could
not accelerate the progress of refinement in
this miraculous manner, I was out of hu-
mour with myself and with a whole nation.
So easily is the humanity of the rich and
great disgusted and discouraged ! as if any
people could be civilized in a moment, and
at the word of command of ignorant pride
or despotic benevolence.

* See Harrison.

CHAPTER IX.

I HAVE not thought it necessary to record
every visit that I received from all my coun-
try neighbours ; but I must now mention
one, which led to important consequences ;
a visit from Sir Harry Ormsby, a very young
dashing man of fortune, who, in expecta-
tion of the happy moment when he should
be of age, resided with his mother, the
dowager Lady Ormsby.. ' Her ladyship had
heard, that there had been some disagree-
ment between her agent, Mr. Hardcastle,
and my people : but she took the earliest
opportunity of expressing her wishes, that
our families should be on an amicable foot-
ing.

Lady Ormsby was just come to the coun-
try, with a large party of her fashionable
friends—some Irish, some English : Lord
and Lady Kilrush ; my Lady Kildangan
and her daughter; the Lady Geraldine
********** knowing widow O’Con-

nor ; the English dasher, Lady Hauton ;
the interesting Mrs. Norton, separated but
not parted from her husband ; the pleasant
Miss Bland; the three Miss Ormsby’s, bet-
ter known by the name of the Swadlinbar
Graces ; two English aides-de-camp from
the castle, and a brace of brigadiers ; beside
other men of inferior note.

I perceived that Sir Harry Ormsby took
it for granted, that I must be acquainted
with the pretensions of all these persons to
celebrity; his talkativeness and my taci-
turnity favoured me so fortunately, that he
never discovered the extent of my ignorance.
He was obligingly impatient to make me
personally acquainted “ with those of whom
I must have heard so much in England.”
Observing that Ormsby Villa was too far
from Glenthorn Castle for a morning visit,
he pressed me to wave ceremony, and to do
Lady Ormsby and him the honour of spend-
ing a week with them, as soon as I could
make it convenient. I accepted this invi-
tation, partly from a slight emotion of cu-
riosity, and partly from my habitual inabi-
lity to resist any reiterated importunity.

Arrived at Ormsby Villa, and introduced

to this crowd of people, I was at first dis-
appointed by seeing nothing extraordinary.

I expected that their manners would have
been as strange to me as some of their names
appeared : but whether it was from my
want of the powers of discrimination, or
from the real sameness of the objects, I
could scarcely, in this fashionable flock,
discern any individual marks of distinction.
At first view, the married ladies appeared
much the same as those of a similar class
in England, whom I had been accustomed
to see. The young ladies I thought, as
usual, “ best distinguished by black, brown,
and fair but I had not yet seen Lady
Geraldine ********** and a great part
of the conversation, the first day I was at
Ormsby Villa, was fdled with lamentations
on the unfortunate tooth-ache, which pre-
vented her ladyship from appearing. She
was talked of so much, and as a person of
such importance, and so essential to the
amusement of the society, that I could not
help feeling a slight wish to see her. The
next day at breakfast she did not appear ;
but, five minutes before dinner, her ladyship's
humblè companion whispered, “ Now Lady

Geraldine is coming, my lord.” I was al-
ways rather displeased to be called upon to
attend to any thing or any body, yet as
Lady Geraldine entered, I gave one invo-
luntary glance of curiosity. I saw a tall,
finely shaped woman, with the command-
ing air of a woman of rank : she moved
well ; not with feminine timidity, but with
ease, promptitude, and decision. She had
fine eyes and a fine complexion, yet no re-
gularity of feature. The only thing that
struck me as really extraordinary was her
indifference when I was introduced to her.
Every body had seemed extremely desirous
that I should see her ladyship, and that her
ladyship should see me; and I was rather
surprised by her unconcerned air. This
piqued me and fixed my attention. She
turned from me, and began to converse with
others. Her voice was agreeable, though
rather loud: she did not speak with the
Irish accent; but, when I listened mali-
ciously, I detected certain Hibernian inflec-
tions ; nothing of the vulgar Irish idiom,
but something that was more interrogative,
more exclamatory, and perhaps more
rhetorical, than the common language of

English ladies, accompanied with much
animation of countenance and demonstra-
tive gesture. This appeared to me peculiar
and unusual, but not affected. She was
uncommonly eloquent, and yet, without
action, her words were not sufficiently rapid
to express her ideas. Her manner appear-
ed foreign, yet it was not quite French. If
I had been obliged to decide, I should, how-
ever, have pronounced it rather more French
than English. To determine which it was,
or whether I had ever seen any thing simi-
lar, I stood considering her ladyship with
more attention, than I had ever bestowed
on any other woman. The words striking
—fascinating—bewitching, occurred to me
as I looked at her and heard her speak. I
resolved to turn my eyes away, and shut
myears; for I was positively determined
not to like her ; I dreaded so much the idea
of a second Hymen. I retreated to the
farthest window, and looked out very sober-
ly upon a dirty fish-pond. Dinner was
announced. I observed Lady Kildangan
manoeuvring to place me beside her daugh-
ter Geraldine, but Lady Geraldine counter-
acted this movement. I was again sur-

prised and piqued. After yielding the en-
vied position to one of the S wadi inbar
Graces, I heard Lady Geraldine whisper to
her next neighbour, cs Baffled, mamma !”
It was strange to me to feel piqued by a
young lady’s not choosing to sit beside me.
After dinner, I left the gentlemen as soon
as possible, because the conversation wea-
ried me. Lord Kilrush, the chief orator,
was a courtier, and could talk of nothing
but Dublin Castle, and my lord lieutenant’s
levees, things of which I, as yet, knew no-
thing. The moment that I went to the
ladies, I was seized upon by the officious
Miss Bland : she could not speak of any
thing but Lady Geraldine, who sat at so
great a distance, and who was conversing
with such animation herself, that she could
not hear her prâ?ieuse, Miss Bland, inform
me, that cc her friend. Lady Geraldine, was
extremely clever:	so	clever, that many

people were at first a little afraid of her;
but that there was not the least occasion ;
for that, where she liked, nobody could be
more affable and engaging.” This judi-
cious friend, a minute afterwards, told me,
as a very great secret, that Lady Geraldine

was an admirable mimic; that she could
draw or speak caricatures ; that she was
also wonderfully happy in the invention
of agnomens and cognomens, so applicable
to the persons, that they could scarcely be
forgotten or forgiven. I was a little anxi-
ous to know whether her ladyship would
honour me with an agnomen. I could not
learn this from Miss Bland, and I was too
prudent to betray my curiosity : I after-
wards heard it, however. Pairing me and
Mr. M‘Leod, whom she had formerly seen
together, her ladyship observed, that Sazv-
ney and Y atone ê were made for each other :
and she sketched, in strong caricature, my
relaxed elongation of limb, and his rigid
rectangularity. A slight degree of fear of
Lady Geraldine's powers kept my attention
alert. In the course of the evening, Lady
Kildangan summoned her daughter to the
music-room, and asked me to come and
hear an Irish song. I exerted myself so far
as to follow immediately; but though sum-
moned, Lady Geraldine did not obey. Miss
Bland tuned the harp, and opened the
music-books on the piano; but no Lady
Geraldine appeared. Miss Bland was sent

backwards and forwards with messages ;
but Lady Geraldine’s ultimatum was, that
she could not possibly sing, because she
was afraid of the tooth-ache. God knows,
her mouth had liever been shut all the even-
ing. cc Well, but,” said Lady Kildangan,
<c she can play for us, cannot she?” No,
her ladyship was afraid of the cold in the
music-room. “ Do, my Lord Glenthorn,
go and tell the dear capricious creature,
that we are very warm here.”

Very relujctantly I obeyed. The lady
Geraldine, with her circle round her, heard
and answered me with the air of a princess.

<c Do you the honour to play for you, my
lord ! Excuse me : I am no professor—I
play so ill, that I make it a rule never to
play but for my own amusement. If you
wish for music, there is Miss Bland ; she
plays incomparably ; and I dare say, will
think herself happy to oblige your lord-
ship.” I never felt so silly, or so much
abashed, as at this instant. “ This comes,”
thought I, “ of acting out of character.
What possessed me to exert myself to ask à
lady to play ; I that have been tired to
death of music ! Why did I let myself be

sent ambassador, when I had no interest in
the embassy ?”

To convince myself and others of my apa-
thy, I threw myself on a sofa, and never
stirred or spoke the remainder of the night.
I presume I appeared fast asleep, else Lady
Geraldine would not have said, within my
hearing,

“ Mamma wants me to catch somebody,
and to be caught by somebody ; but that
will not be; for, do you know, I think
somebody is nobody.”

I was offended as much as it was in my
nature to be offended, and I began to medi-
tate apologies for shortening my visit at
Ormsby Villa : but, though I was shocked
by the haughtiness of Lady Geraldine, and
accused her, in my own mind, of want
of delicacy and politeness, yet I could not
now suspect her of being an accomplice with
her mother in any matrimonial designs upon
me. From the moment I was convinced of*
this, my conviction was, I suppose,^ visible
to her ladyship’s penetrating eyes, and from
that instant she showed me that she could
be polite and agreeable. Now, soothed to
a state of ease and complacency, I might

have sunk to indifference and ennui, but
fresh singularities in this lady struck me,
and kept my attention awake and fixed
upon her character. If she had treated me
with tolerable civility at first,'I never should
have thought about her. High-born and
high-bred, she seemed to consider more
what she thought of others, than what
others thought of her. Frank, candid and
affable, yet opiniated, insolent and an egot-
ist : her candour and affability appeared
the effect of a naturally good temper 5 her
insolence and egotism only those of a spoiled
child. She seemed to talk of’herself purely
to oblige others, as the most interesting
possible topic of conversation; for such it.
had always been to her fond mother, who
idolized her ladyship as an only daughter,
and the representative of an ancient house.

Confident of her talents, conscious of her
» *

charms, and secure of her station. Lady-
Geraldine-gave free scope to her high spi-
rits, her fancy, and her turn for ridicule.
She looked, spoke, and acted, like a person
privileged to think, say and do, what she
pleased. lier raillery, like the raillery of
princes, was without fear of retort. She

was not ill-natured, yet careless to whom
she gave offence, provided she produced
amusement; and in this she seldom failed;
for, in her conversation, there was much of
the raciness of Irish wit, and the oddity of
Irish humour. The singularity that struck
me most about her ladyship, was her indif-
ference to flattery. She certainly preferred
frolic. Miss Bland was her humble com-
panion; Miss Tracey her butt. Her lady-
ship appeared to consider Miss Bland as a
necessary appendage to her rank and per-
son, like her dress' or her shadow ; and she
seemed to think no more of the one than of'
the other. She suffered Miss Bland to fol-
low her ; but she would go in quest of Miss
Tracey. Miss Bland was allowed to speak ;
but her ladyship* listened to Miss Trace}'.
Miss Bland seldom obtained an answer ;
but Miss* Tracey never opened her lips
without being honoured by a rqoartee.

In describing Miss Tracey, Lady Gerald-
ine said,

“ Poor simpleton ! she cannot help imi-
tating all she sees us do; yet, would you
believe it, she really has starts of common
sense, and some tolerable ideas of her own.

—Spoiled by bad company ! In the language
of the bird-fanciers, she has a few notes
nightingale, and all the rest rubbish.”

It was one of Lady Geraldine’s delights,
to humour Miss Tracey’s rage for imitating
the fashions of fine people.

“ Now you shall see Miss Tracey appear
at the ball to-morrow, in every thing that
I have sworn to her is fashionable. Nor
have I cheated her in a single article : but
the tout ensemble I leave to her better judg-
ment; and you shall see her, I trust, a per-
fect monster, formed of every creature’s
best: Lady Kilrush’s feathers, Mrs. Moore’s
wig, Mrs. O’Connor’s gown, Mrs. Lighton’s
sleeves, and all the necklaces of all the Miss
Ormsbys. She has no taste, no judgment;
none at all, poor thing ; but she can imitate
as well as those Chinese painters, who, in
their drawings, give you the flower of one
plant stuck on the stalk of another, and
garnished with the leaves of a third.”

Miss Tracey’s appearance the ensuing
night justified all Lady Geraldine’s predic-
tions, and surpassed her ladyship’s most san-
guine hopes. Even I, albeit unused to the
laughing mood, could not forbear smiling

at the humour and ease, with which her
ladyship played off this girl’s credulous
vanity.

At breakfast the next morning, Lord
Kilrush, in his grave manner (always too
solemn by half for the occasion), declared,
“ that no man was more willing than him-
self to enter into a jest in proper time, and
season, and measure, and so forth; but
that it was really, positively, morally un-
justifiable, in his apprehension, the making
this poor girl so publicly ridiculous.”

“ My good lord,” replied Lady Geraldine,
<c all the world are ridiculous some way or
other : some in public, some in private.
Now,” continued she, with an appealing
look to the whole company, “ now, after
all, what is there more extravagant in my
Miss Tracey’s delighting, at sixteen, in six
yards of pink ribbon, than in your courtier
sighing, at sixty, for three yards of blue
ribbon ? or what is there more ridiculous in
her coming simpering into a ball-room, fan-
cying herself the mirror of fashion, when
she is a figure for a print-shop, than in the
courtier rising solemnly in the House of
Lords, believing himself an orator, and ex-

pec ting to make a vast reputation, by pick-
ing up, in every debate, the very worst ar-
guments that every body else let fall ? There
would be no living in this world, if we were
all to see and expose one another’s ridicules.
My plan is much the best—to help my
friends to expose themselves, and then they
are infinitely obliged to me.”

Satisfied with silencing all opposition, and
seeing that the majority was with her, Lady
Geraldine persisted in her course ; and I
was glad she was incorrigible, because her
faults entertained me. As to love, I
thought I was perfectly safe ; because,
though I admired her quickness and clever-
ness, yet I still, at times, perceived, or fan-
cied I perceived, some want of polish, and
elegance, and tact. She was not exactly
cut out according to my English pattern of
a woman of fashion ; so I thought I might
amuse myself without danger, as it was
partly at her ladyship’s expense. But about
this time I was alarmed for myself by a
slight twinge of jealousy. As I was stand-
ing lounging upon the steps at the hall-
door, almost as ennuyé as usual, I saw a
carriage at a distance, between the trees,

driving up the approach ; and, at the same
instant, I heard Lady Geraldine’s eager
voice in the hall—

cc Oh ! they are coming; he is coming;
they are come. Run, Miss Bland, run, and
give Lord Craiglethorpe my message before
he gets out of the carriage—before any
body sees him.”

Afraid of hearing what I should not hear,
I walked down the steps deliberately, and
turned into a shrubbery walk, to leave the
coast clear. Out ran Miss Bland : and
then it was that I felt the twinge—very
slight, however. “ Who is this Lord Craigle-
thorpe, with whom Lady Geraldine is on
such favourable terms ? I wonder what kind
of looking man he is; and what could the
message mean ?—but, at all events, it can-
not Concern me ; yet I am curious to see
this Lord Craiglethorpe. I wonder any
woman can like a man with so strange a
name : but does she like him, after all ?—
Why do I plague myself about it ?”

As I returned from my saunter, I was
met fore-right by Miss Bland—

€( A charming day, ma’am,” said I, en-
deavouring to pass on.

“ A charming day, my lord ! But I must
stop your lordship a moment.—Oh, I am
so out of breath—I went the wrong way—”
“ The wrong way ! Indeed ! I am sorry,

I am concerned you should have had so
much trouble.”

“ No trouble in the world. Only I want
to beg you’ll keep our secret—my Lady
Geraldine’s secret.”

tc Undoubtedly, madam—a man of ho-
nour—Lady Geraldine cannot doubt—her
ladyship’s secret is perfectly safe.”

ec But do you know it ? You don’t know
it yet, my lord ?”

u Pardon me; I was on the steps just
now. I thought you saw me.”

“ I did, my lord—but I don’t under-
stand—”

“ Nor I, neither,” interrupted I, half
laughing ; for I began to think I was mis-
taken in my suspicions; tc pray explain
yourself, my dear Miss Bland : I was very
rude to be so quick in interrupting you.”
Miss Bland then made me the confidant
of a charming scheme of Lady Geraldine’s,
for quizzing Miss Tracey.

“ She has never, in her life, seen Lord

Craiglethorpe, who is an English lord tra-
velling through Ireland,” continued Miss
Bland. “ Now, you must know, that Miss
Tracey is passionately fond of lords, let
them be what they may. Now, Lord
Craiglethorpe, this very morning, sent his
groom with a note and excuse to Lady
Ormsby, for not coming to us to day ; be-
cause, he said, he was bringing down in the
chaise with him a surveyor, to survey his
estate near here j and he could not possibly
think of bringing the surveyor, who is a low
man, to Ormsby Villa. But Lady Ormsby
would take no apology, and wrote by the
groom to beg that Lord Craiglethorpe
would make no scruple of bringing the sur-
veyor ; for you know she is so polite and
accommodating, and all that. Well, the
note was scarcely gone, before Lady Ge-
raldine thought of her charming scheme,
and regretted, of all things, she had not put
it into it.”

“ It into it r repeated I to myself.—
“ Ma’am I” said I, looking a little bewild-
ered.

“ But,” continued my clear narrator, “ I
promised to remedy all that, by running to

meet the carriage, which was what I ran
for when you saw me, my lord, in such a
hurry.”

I,bowed—and was as wise as ever.

" So, my lord, you comprehend, that the
surveyor, whose name, whose odious name,
is Gabbitt, is to be my Lord Craiglethorpe,,
and my Lord Craiglethorpe is to be passed
for Mr. Gabbitt upon Miss Tracey; and,
you will see. Miss Tracey will admire Mr.
Gabbitt prodigiously, and call him vastly,
genteel, when she thinks him a lord. Your
lordship will keep our secret: and she is
sure Lord Craiglethorpe will do any thing
to oblige her, because he is a near con-
nexion of hers. But, I assure you, it is not
every body could get Lord Craiglethorpe to
join in a joke; for he is very stiff, and cold,
and high. Of course your lordship will
know which is the real lord at first sight.
He is a full head taller than Gabbitt.”

. Never was explanation finally more sa-
tisfactory : and whether the jest was really
well contrived and executed, or whether I
was put into a humour to think so, I can-
not exactly determine; but, I confess, I

was amused with the scenes that followed,
though I felt that they were not quite jus-
tifiable even in jest.

The admiration of Miss Tracey for the
false Craiglethorpe, as Lady Geraldine call-
ed Mr. Gabbitt ; the awkwardness of Mr.
Gabbitt with his title, and the awkwardness
of Lord Craiglethorpe without it, were fine
subjects for her ladyship’s satirical humour.

ïn another point of view. Lord Craigle-
thorpe afforded her ladyship amusement—
as an English traveller, full of English pre-
judices against Ireland and every thing
Irish. Whenever Miss Tracey was out of
the room, Lady Geraldine allowed Lord
Craiglethorpe to be himself again ; but he
did not fare the better for this restoration to
his honours. Lady Geraldine contrived to
make him as ridiculous in his real, as in his
assumed character. Lord Craiglethorpe
was, as Miss Bland had described him,
very stiff, cold, and high. His manners
were in the extreme of English reserve; and
his ill-bred show of contempt for the Irish
was sufficient provocation and justification
of Lady Geraldine’s ridicule. He was

much in awe of his fair and witty cousin :
she could easily put him out of counte-
nance, for he was extremely bashful.

His lordship had that sort of bashfulness,
which makes a man surly and obstinate in
his taciturnity; which makes him turn
upon all who approach him, as if they were
going to assault him; which makes him
answer a question as if it were an injury,
and repel a compliment as if it were an in-
sult. Once, when he was out of the room,
Lady Geraldine exclaimed, “ That cousin
Craiglethorpe of mine is scarcely an agree-
able man : the awkwardness of mauvaise-
honte might be pitied and pardoned, even
in a nobleman,” continued her ladyship,
“ if it really proceeded from humility ; but
here, when I know it is connected with se-
cret and inordinate arrogance, ’tis past all
endurance. Even his ways of sitting and
standing provoke me, they are so self-sufli-
cient. Have you observed how he stands
at the fire ? Oh, the caricature of‘ the Eng-
lisli five-side' outdone ! Then, if he sits, we
hope that change of posture may afford our
eyes transient relief; but worse again : bol-
stered up, with his back against his chair.

his hands in his pockets, and his legs thrown
out, in defiance of all passengers and all
decorum, there he sits, in magisterial si-
lence, throwing • a gloom upon all conver-
sation. As the Frenchman said of the
Englishman, for whom even his politeness
could not find another compliment, ‘ II
faut avouer que ce Monsieur a un grand ta-
lent pour le silence —he holds his tongue,
till people actually believe that he has some-
thing to say—a mistake they could never
fall into if he would but speak.”

Some of the company attempted to inter-
pose a word or two in favour of Lord
Craiglethorpe’s timidity, but the vivacious
and merciless lady went on.

“ I tell you, my good friends, it is not
timidity ; it is all pride. I would pardon
his dulness, and even his ignorance; for
one, as you say, might be the fault of his
nature, and the other of his education : but
his self-sufficiency is his own fault, and that
I will not, and cannot pardon. Somebody
says, that nature may make a fool, but a
coxcomb is always of his own making.
Now, my cousin—(as he is my cousin, I
may say what I please of him)—my cousin
Craiglethorpe is a solemn coxcomb, who

thinks, because his vanity is not talkative
and sociable, that it’s not vanity. What a
mistake ! his silent superciliousness is to me
more intolerable than the most garrulous
egotism, that ever laid itself open to my ri-
dicule.”

Miss Bland and Miss Ormsby both con-
fessed that Lord Craiglethorpe was vastly
too silent.

“ For the honour of my country,” con-
tinued Lady Geraldine, cc I am determined
to make this man talk, and he shall say all
that I know he thinks of us poor Irish sa-
vages. If he would but speak, one could
answer him : if he would find fault, one
might defend : if he would laugh, one might
perhaps laugh again : but here he comes to
hospitable, open-hearted Ireland, eats as
well as he can in his own country ; drinks
better than he can in his own country ;
sleeps as well as he canin his own country;
accepts all our kindness, without a word or
a look of thanks, and seems the whole time
to think, that, c Born for his use, we live
but to oblige him.’ There he is at this
instant : look at him, walking in the park,
with his note-book in his hand, setting down

our faults, and conning them by rote. We
are even with him. I understand, Lady
Kilrush, that my bright cousin Craigle-
thorpe means to write a book, a great book,
upon Ireland ?

Lady Kilrush replied, that she under-
stood Lord Craiglethorpe had it in contem-
plation to publish a tour through Ireland,
or a view of Ireland, or something of that
nature.

“ He ! with his means of acquiring in-
formation !” exclaimed Lady Geraldine—
u posting from one great man’s house to
another—what can he see or know of the
manners of any rank of people, but of the
class of gentry, which in England and Ire-
land is much the same ? As to the lower
classes, I don’t think he ever speaks to
them ; or, if he does, what good can it do
him ? for he can’t understand their modes
of expression, nor they his; if he inquire
about a matter of fact, I defy him to get
the truth out of them, if they don’t wish to
tell it; and; for some reason or other, they
will, nine times in ten, not wish to tell it to
an Englishman. There is not a man, wo-
man, or child, in any cabin in Ireland, who

would not have wit and 'cuteness enough to
make my lard believe just what they please.
So, after posting from Dublin to Cork, and
from the Giants* Causeway to Killarney :
after travelling east, west, north, and south,
my wise cousin Craiglethorpe will know
just as much of the lower Irish, as the
cockney who has never been out of London,
and who has never, in all his born days,
seen an Irishman, but on the English stage,
where the representations are usually as like
the originals, as the Chinese pictures of
lions, drawn from description, are to a real
lion.

“ Now! now! look at his lordship!”
cried Miss Bland ; <c he has his note-book
out again.’*

tc Mercy on us !” said Miss Calhvell,”
<c how he is writing !”

“ Yes, yes, write on, my good cousin
Craiglethorpe,” pursued Lady Geraldine,
and fill the little note-book, which will soon,
heigh ! presto ! turn to a ponderous quarto.
I shall have a copy, bound in Morocco, no
doubt, from the author, if I behave myself
prettily $ and I will earn it, by supplying
valuable information. Yrou shall see, my

friends, how I’ll deserve well of my coun-
try, if you’ll only keep my counsel and your
own countenances.”

Presently Lord Craiglethorpe entered the
room, walking very pompously, and putting
his note-book up as he advanced.

“ O, my dear lord, open the book again,
I have a bull for you.”

Lady Geraldine, after putting his lord-
ship in good humour by this propitiatory
offering of a bull, continued to supply him,
either directly or indirectly, by some of her
confederates, with the most absurd anec-
dotes, incredible facts, stale jests, and blun-
ders, such as never were made by true-born
Irishmen ; all which my Lord Craiglethorpe
took down with an industrious sobriety, at
which the spectators could scarcely refrain
from laughing. Sometimes he would pause,
and exclaim, ff A capital anecdote ! a cu-
rious fact ! May I give my authority ? may
I quote your ladyship ?” “ Yes, if you’ll
pay me a compliment in the preface,”
whispered Lady Geraldine: “ and now,
dear cousin, do go up stairs and put it all
in inky

When she had dispatched the noble au-

thor, her ladyship indulged her laughter.
<c But now,” cried she, “ only imagine a
set of sober English readers studying my
cousin Craiglethorpe’s new view of Ireland,
and swallowing all the nonsense it will con-
tain !”

When Lord Kilrush remonstrated against
the cruelty of letting the man publish such
stuff, and represented it as a fraud upon the
public. Lady Geraldine laughed still more,
and exclaimed, “ Surely you don’t think I
would use the public and my poor cousin
so ill. No, I am doing him and the public
the greatest possible service. Just when he
is going to leave us, when the writing box
is packed, I will step up to him, and tell
him the truth. I will show him what a far-
rago of nonsense he has collected as mate-
rials for his quarto : and convince him, at
once, how utterly unfit he is to write a
book, at least a book on Irish affairs.—
Won’t this be deserving well of my country
and of my cousin ?”

Neither on this occasion, nor on any
other, were the remonstrances of my Lord
Kilrush of power to stop the course of this
lady’s flow of spirits and raillery.

Whilst she was going on in this manner
with the real Lord Craiglethorpe, Miss
Tracey was taking charming walks in the
park with Mr. Gabbitt, and the young
lady began to be seriously charmed with
her false lord. This wras carrying the jest
farther than Lady Geraldine had intended
or foreseen ; and her good-nature would
probably have disposed her immediately
to dissolve the enchantment, had she not
been provoked by the interference of Lord
Kilrush, and the affected sensibility of Miss
Clementina Ormsby, who, to give me an
exalted opinion of her delicacy, expostu-
lated incessantly in favour of the deluded
fair one.

“ But, my dear Lady Geraldine, I do as-
sure you it really hurts my feelings. This
is going too far—when it comes to the
heart. I can’t laugh, I own—the poor girl’s
affections will be engaged—she is really fall-
ing in love with this odious surveyor.”

cc But now, my dear Clementina, I do
assure you, it really hurts my feelings to
hear you talk so childishly. When it comes
to the heart ! affections engaged ! You
talk of falling in love as if it were a terrible

fall : for my part, I should pity a person
much more for falling down stairs. Why,
my dear, where is the mighty height from
which Miss Tracey could fall ? She does
not live in the clouds, Clementina, as you
do. No ladies live there now—for the best
of all possible reasons—because there are
no men there. So, my love, make haste
and come down, before you are out of
your teens, or you may chance to be left
there till you are an angel or an old maid.
Trust me, my dear, I, who have tried,
tell you, there is no such thing as falling
in love now-a-days: you may slip, slide, or
stumble, but to fall in love, I defy you.”

I saw Lady Kildangan’s eyes fix upon
me as her daughter pronounced the last
sentence.

“ Geraldine, my dear, you do not know
what you are talking about/’ said her lady-
ship. “ Your time may come, Geraldine.
Nobody should be too courageous. Cupid
does not like to be defied.”

Lady Kildangan walked away, as she
spoke, with a very well satisfied air, leaving
a party of us young people together. Lady

Geraldine looked haughtily vexed. When)
in this mood, her wit gave no quarter ;
spared neither sex nor age.	i

“ Every body says,” whispered she,fC that
mamma is the most artful woman in the.
world ; and I should believe it, only that
every body says it : now, if it were true,
nobody would know it.” '	.I

Lady Geraldine’s air of disdain towards
me was resumed. I did not quite under-
stand. Was it pride? was it coquetry ? She
certainly blushed deeply, and for the first
time that I ever saw her blush, when her
mother said, “ Your time may come, Ge-
raldine.”

My week being now at an end, I resolved
to take my leave. When I announced this
resolution, I was assailed with the most
pressing entreaties to stay a few days longer
—one day longer—Lady Ormsby and Sir
Harry said every thing that could be said
upon the occasion : indeed, it seemed a
matter of general interest to all, except to
Lady Geraldine. She appeared wholly in-
different, and I was not even gratified by
any apparent affectation of desiring my de-

parture. Curiosity to see whether this
would be sustained by her ladyship to the
last, gave me resolution sufficient to resist
the importunities of Sir Harry ; and I de-
parted, rejoicing that my indifference was
equal to her ladyship’s. As Tasso said of
some fair one, whom he met at the car-
nival of Mantua, I ran some risk of falling
in love. I had been so far roused from my
habitual apathy, that I actually made some
reflections. As I returned home, I began
to perceive, that there was some differ-
ence between woman and woman, beside
the distinctions of rank, fortune, and figure.
I think I owe to Lady Geraldine my first
relish for wit, and my first idea that a
woman might be, if not a reasonable, at
least a companionable animal. I com-
pared her ladyship with the mere puppets
and parrots of fashion, of whom I had been
wearied : and I began to suspect, that one
might find, in a lady’s cc lively nonsense,”
a relief from ennui. These reflections,
however, • did not prevent me from sleeping
the greatest part of the morning on my way
home ; nor did I dream of any thing that I
can remember.

At the porter’s lodge I saw Ellinor sitting
at her spinning wheel, and my thoughts
took up my domestic affairs, just where I
had left them the preceding week.

CHAPTER X.

IN vain I attempted to interest myself in
my domestic affairs ; the silence and soli-
tude of my own castle appeared to me in-
tolerably melancholy, after my return from
Ormsby Villa. There was a blank in my
existence during a week, in which I can re-
member nothing that I did, said, or thought,
except what passed during one ride, which
Air, M‘Leod compelled my politeness to
take with him. He came with the same
face to see me, and the same set of ideas,
as those he had before I went to Ormsby
Villa. He began to talk of my schemes for
improving my tenantry, and of my wish,
that he should explain his notions relative
to the education of the poor of Ireland,
which, he said, as I now seemed to be at
leisure, he was ready to do as concisely as
possible. As concisely as possible w^ere the
only words of this address that I heard with
satisfaction ; but of course I bowed, said I

was much obliged, and should be happy to
have the advantage of Mr. McLeod’s opi-
nions and sentiments. What these were I
cannot recollect, for I settled myself in a
reverie soon after his voice began to sound
upon my ear ; but I remember at last he
wakened me, by proposing that I should
ride with him to see a school-house and
some cottages, which he had built on a
little estate of his own in my neighbour-
hood i “ for,” said he, “ ’tis better my lord
to show you what can be done with these
people, than to talk of what might be ef-
fected.”

“ Very true,” said I, agreeing readily ;
because I wanted to finish a conversation
that wearied me, and to have a refreshing
ride. It was a delightful evening, and when
we came on M‘Leod’s estate, I really could
not help being pleased and interested. In
an unfavourable situation, with all nature,
vegetable and animal against him, he had
actually 4 created a paradise amid the wilds.*
There was nothing wonderful in any thing
I saw around me, but there was such an
air of neatness and comfort, order and ac-
tivity, in the people, and in their cottages,

that I almost thought myself in England,
and I could not forbear exclaiming—“ How
could all this be brought about in Ireland !”
“ Chiefly by not doing and not expecting
too much at first,” said McLeod. “ We
took time, and had patience. We began
by setting them the example of some very
slight improvements, and then, lured on bf
the sight of success, they could make simi-
lar trials themselves. My wife and I went
among them, and talked to them in their
cottages, and took an interest in their con-
cerns, and did not want to have every thing
our own way ; and when they saw that,
they began to consider which way was best :
so by degrees we led where we could not
have driven; and raised in them, by little
and little, a taste for conveniences and
comforts. Then the business was done, for4
the moment the taste and ambition were
excited, to work the people went to gratify
them ; and accordingly as they exerted
themselves, we helped them. Perhaps it
was best for them and for us, that we were
not rich, for we could not do too much at
a time, and were never tempted to begin
grand schemes that we could not finish.

There/’ said M‘Leod, pointing to a cottage
with a pretty porch covered with woodbine*
and a neat garden, in which many children
were busily at work, “ that house and that
garden were the means of doing all the
rest ; that is our school-house. We could
not expect to do much with the old, whose
habits were fixed ; but we tried to give the
young children better notions, and it was
a long time before we could bring that to
bear. Twenty-six years we have been at
this work, and in that time if we have done
any thing, it was by beginning with the
children ; a race of our own training has
now grown up, and they go on in the way
they were taught, and prosper to our hearts’
content, and what is better still, to their
hearts’ content.”

ATLeod, habitually grave and taciturn,
seemed quite enlivened and talkative this
day; but I verily believe, that not the
slightest ostentation or vanity inspired him,
for I never before or since heard him talk or
allude to his own good deeds ; I am con-
vinced his motive was to excite me to per-
severe in my benevolent projects, by show-
ing what had been done by small means.

He was so truly in earnest, that he never
perceived how tired I was ; indeed he was
so little in the habit of expecting sympathy
or applause, that he never missed even the
ordinary expressions of concurrent com-
plaisance.

<c Religion,” continued he, “ is the great
difficulty in Ireland. We make no differ-
ence between protestants and catholics j
we always have admitted both into our
school. The priest comes on Saturday
morning, and the parish minister on Satur-
day evening, to hear the children belonging
to each church their catechisms, and to in-
struct them in the tenets of their faith. And
as we keep to our word, and never attempt
making proselytes, nor directly, or indi-
rectly, interfere with their religious opi-
nions, the priests are glad to let us instruct
the catholic children in all other points,
which they plainly see must advance their
temporal interests.”

Mr. McLeod invited me to go in and look
at the school. “ In a hedge or ditch school,*9
said he, “ which I once passed on this road,
and in which I saw a crowd of idle children,
I heard the schoolmaster cry out, « Re-

hearse ! rehearse ! there’s company going
by;’ and instantly all the boys snatched up
their books, and began gabbling as fast as
ever they could, to give an idea to the pas-
senger of their diligence in repeating their
lessons. But here, my lord,” continued
M‘Leod, “ you will not see any exhibitions
got up for company. I hate such tricks.
Walk in, my lord, if you please.”

I walked in, but am ashamed to say, that
I observed only that every thing looked as
if it had been used for many years, and yet
not worn out ; and the whole school ap-
peared as if all were in their places, and
occupied and intent upon their business:
but this general recollection is all I have
retained. The enthusiasm for improvement
had subsided in my mind, and, though I
felt a transient pleasure in the present pic-
ture of the happiness of these poor people
and their healthy children, yet, as I rode
home, the images faded away like a dream.
I resolved, indeed, at some future period,
to surpass all that Mr. M£Leod had done,
or all that with his narrow income he could
ever accomplish ; and to this resolution I
was prompted by jealousy of Mr. M‘Leod

rather than by benevolence. Before I had
arranged, even in imagination, my plans,
young Ormsby came one morning, and
pressed me to return with him to Ormsby
Villa. I yielded to his solicitations, and to
my own wishes. When I arrived, the la-
dies were all at their toilettes, except Miss
Bland, who was in the book-room with the
gentlemen, ready to receive me with her
perpetual smile. Wherever Miss Bland
went, she was always l’amie de la maison,
accustomed to share with the lady of the
house the labour of entertaining her guests.
This double of Lady Ormsby talked to me
most courteously of all the nothings of the
day, and informed me of the changes which
had taken place in the ever-varying suc-
cession of company at Ormsby Villa. The
two brigadiers and ohe of the aides-de-
camp were gone, but Captain Andrews, an-
other castle aid-de-camp was come, and my
Lord O’Toole had arrived. Then followed
a by-conversation between Miss Bland and
some of the gentlemen about the joy and
sorrow which his lordship's arrival would
create in the hearts of two certain ladies,
one of whom, as I gathered from the inu-

endoes, was Lady Hauton, and the other
Lady O’Toole. As I knew nothing of
Dublin intrigues and scandal, I was little
attentive to all this. Miss Bland, persist-
ing in entertaining me, proceeded to inform
me, that my Lord O’Toole had brought
down with him Mr. Cecil Devereux, who
was a wit and a poet, very handsome and
gallant, and one of the most fashionable
young men in Dublin. I determined not
to like him—I always hated a flourish of
trumpets ; whoever enters, announced in
this parading manner, appears to disadvan-
tage. Mr. Cecil Devereux entered just as
the flourish ceased. He was not at all the
sort of person I was prepared to see ; though
handsome, and with the air of a man used
to good company, there was nothing of a
coxcomb in his manner ; on the contrary,
there was such an appearance of careless-
ness about himself, and deference towards
others, that, notwithstanding the injudicious
praise that had been bestowed on him,
and my consequent resolution to dislike
him, I was pleased and familiar with him
before I had been ten min tes i his com-
pany. Lord Kilrush introduced him to me

with great pomposity, as a gentleman of
talents, for whom he and his brother
O’Toole interested themselves much. This
air of patronage, I saw, disgusted Mr. De-
vereux, and instead of suffering himself to
be shown off\ he turned the conversation
from his own poems to general subjects.
He asked me some questions about a cu-
rious cavern, or subterraneous way, near
Castle Glentliorn, which stretched from the
sea-shore to a considerable, distance under
the rock, and communicated with an old
abbey near the castle. Mr. Devereux said,
that such subterraneous places had been
formerly used in Ireland as granaries by the
ancient inhabitants ; but a gentleman of
the neighbourhood who was present ob-
served, that the caverns on this coast had,
within his memory, been used as hiding
places by smugglers ; on this hint Lord
Kilrush began a prosing dissertation upon
smugglers and contraband traders, and
talked to me a prodigious deal about ex-
ports and imports, and bounties, and the
balance of trade. Not one word he said
did I comprehend, and I question whether
his lordship understood the subjects upon

which he spoke so dictatorially ; but he
thought he succeeded in giving me an opi-
nion of his wisdom and information. His
brother, O’Toole, appeared next; he did
not look like a man of gallantry, as I had
been taught to expect from the hints thrown
out respecting Lady Hauton; his lordship’s
whole soul seemed devoted to ambition, and
he talked so much of great men, and state
affairs, and court intrigues, and honours
and preferments, that I began to fancy I
had been buried alive, because I knew little
of these things. I was tired of hearing him,
yet mortified that I could not speak exactly
in the same manner, and with the same air
of being the best possible authority. I be-
gan to wish, that I also had some interest
at court. The cares and troubles of the
ambitious man, so utterly repugnant to the
indolence of my disposition, vanished in
this moment of infatuation from my view,
and I thought only of the pleasures of power.
Such is the infectious nature of ambition !

Mr. Devereux helped me to throw off
this dangerous contagion, before it did me
any injury. He happened to stay in the
room with me a quarter of an hour after the

other gentlemen went to dress. Though
not often disposed to conversation with a
stranger, yet I was won by this gentle-
man’s easy address ; he politely talked of
the English fashionable world, with which
he knew that I was well acquainted ; I,
with equal politeness, recurred to the Irish
great world; we fastened together upon
Lord O’Toole, who took us to Dublin
Castle, and I began to express my regret
that I had not yet been at the Irish court,
and that I had not earlier in life made my-
self of political consequence. “ Ambition,”
said I, “ might help to keep a man awake
and alive ; all common pleasures have long
since ceased to interest me. They really
cannot make me stir.”

“ My lord,” said Mr. Devereux, “ you
would do better to sit or lie still all your life,
than toil for such vain objects.

‘f Full little knowest thou that hast not tried,

“ What Hell it is in sueing long to bide.

“ Your lordship may remember Spencer’s
description of that Hell ?”

cc Not exactly,” said I, unwilling to lower
the good opinion this gentleman seemed to

have taken for granted of my literature. He
took Spencer’s poems out of the book-case,
and I actually rose from my seat to read
the passage; for what trouble will not even
the laziest of mortals take to preserve the
esteem of one, by whom he sees that he is
over estimated. I read the following ten
lines without yawning !

•* Pull little knowest thou that hast not tried,

“ What Hell it is iu sueing long to bide ;

** To lose good days, that might be better spent,

“ To waste long nights in pensive discontent,

" To speed to day, to be put back to-morrow,

*' To feed on hope, to pine with fear and sorrow,

** To fret thy soul with crosses and with cares,
u To eat thy heart through comfortless despairs,

" To fawn, to crouch, to wait, to ride, to run,

** To spend, to give, to want, to be undone.”

“ Very strong, indeed,” said I, with a
competent air, as if used to judge of poetry.

u And it comes with still greater force,
when we consider by whom it was written.
A man, you know, my lord, who had been
secretary to a Lord Lieutenant.”

I felt my nascent ambition die away
within me. I acknowledged it was better
to spend an easy life. My determination

was confirmed at this instant by the ap-
pearance of Lady Geraldine. Ambition
and love, it is said, are incompatible pas-
sions. 'Neither of them had yet possession
of my heart, but love and Lady Geraldine
had perhaps a better chance than ambition
and Lord O’Toole. Lady Geraldine ap-
peared in high spirits; and though I was
not a vain man, I could not help fancying,
that my return to Ormsby Villa contributed
to her charming vivacity. This gratified
me secretly and soberly, as much as it vi-
sibly delighted her mother. Miss Bland,
to pay her court to Lady Kildangan, ob-
served, that Lady Geraldine was in uncom-
monly fine spirits this evening. Lady Ge-
raldine threw back a haughty frown over
her left shoulder ; this was the only time I
ever saw her notice, in any manner, any
thing that fell from her obsequious friend.
To avert the fair one’s displeasure, I asked
for Miss Tracey and Mr. Gabbitt.

“ Mr. Gabbitt,” said her ladyship, re-
suming her good humour instantly ; “ Mr.
Gabbitt is gone off the happiest man in Ire-
land, with the hopes of surveying my Lord
O’Toole’s estate j a good job, which I was

bound in honour to obtain for him, as a re-
ward for taking a good joke. After mocking
him with the bare imagination of a feast,
you know the Barmecide in the Arabian
Tales gave poor Shakabac a substantial
dinner, a full equivalent for the jest.”
cc And.Miss Tracey ?” said I, “ what did
your ladyship do for her?”

cc I persuaded her mamma, that the
sweet creature was falling into an atrophy;
So she carried the forlorn damsel post haste
to the Black Rock for the recovery of her
health, or her heart. Clementina, my dear,
no reproachful looks ; in your secret soul
do not you know, that I could not do a
young lady a greater favour, than to give
her a plausible excuse for getting away from
home.”

I was afraid that Lady Geraldine would
feel the want of her butt; however, I found
that Miss Tracey’s place was supplied by
Captain Andrews, one of the castle aides-
de-camp ; and when Captain Andrews was
out of the way, Lord Kilrush, and his bro-
ther O’Toole, were good marks. High and
mighty as these personages thought them-
selves 5 and respectfully, nay obsequiously,

as they were treated by most others, to this
lady their characters appeared only a good
study ; and to laugh at them seemed only a
good practice.

“ Perhaps, my lord,” said she to me,
** you do not yet know my Lord O’Toole ?”
“ I had the honour to be introduced to
him to day.”

“ That’s well ; for he thinks that,

* Not to know him, argues yourself unknown/

“ But as your lordship is a stranger in
this country, you may be pardoned ; and I
will make you better acquainted with him.
I suppose you know there are many Tooles
in Ireland, some very ancient, respectable,
and useful : this, however, is but a mere
political tool, and the worst of all tools, a
cat’s paw. There’s one thing to the credit
of these brothers, they agree vastly well \
for one delights in being always on the
stage, and the other always behind the
scenes. These brothers, with Captain An-
drews—I hope they are none of them within
hearing—form a charming trio, all admi-
rable in their way. My Lord O’Toole is—

artifice without art. My Lord Kilrush—
importance without power. And, Captain
Andrews—pliability without case. Poor
Andrews ! he's a defenceless animal—safe
in impenetrable armour. Give him but
time—as a man said, who once showed me
a land tortoise—give him but time to draw
his head into his shell, and a broad-wheeled
waggon may go over him without hurting
him. Lord Glenthorn, did you ever ob-
serve Captain Andrews’s mode of conver-
sation?”

“ No; I never heard him converse.”

“ Converse ! nor I indeed ; but you have
heard him talk.”

“ I have heard him say—Very true—and
Of course.”

“ Lord Glenthorn is quite severe this
evening,” said Mrs. O’Connor.

“ But though your lordship,” continued
Lady Geraldine, “ may have observed Cap-
tain Andrews’s wonderful economy of words,
do you know whence it arises ? Perhaps, you
think from his perception of his own want
of understanding.”

“ Not from his perception of the want,”
said I.

cc Again! again!” said Mrs. O’Connor,
with an insulting tone of surprise; “ Lord
Glenthorn’s quite witty this evening.”

Lady Geraldine looked as if she was fully
sensible of the want of politeness in Mrs.
O’Connor’s mode of praising. “ But, my
lord,” pursued she, “ you wrong Captain
Andrews, if you attribute his monosyllabic
replies either to stupidity or timidity. You
have not guessed the reason why he never
gives on any subject more than half an
opinion.”

“ It was in the diplomatic school he was
taught that art,” said Mr. Devereux.

“ You must know,” pursued Lady Ge-
raldine, “ that Captain Andrews is only an
aide-de-camp till a diplomatic situation can
be found for him ; and to do him justice he
has been so well trained in the diplomatic
school, that he will not hazard an assertion
on any subject; he is not certain of any
thing, not even of his own identity.”

“ He assuredly wants,” said Devereux,
“ the only proof of existence which Des-
cartes would admit, I think, therefore I am.”
<c He has such a holy horreur of com-
mitting himself,” continued Lady Gerald-

ine, “ that if you were to ask him if the
sun rose this morning, he would answer
with his sweet smile—So I am told—or—So
I am informed.”

“ Beggingyourladyship’spardon,” cried
Mr. Devereux, “ that is much too affirma-
tive. In the pure diplomatic style, imper-
sonal verbs must ever be used in preference
to active or passive. aSo I am told, lays
him open to the dangerous questions—Who
told you ?—or—By whom were you in-
formed ? Then he is forced into the impru-
dence of giving up his authorities ; whereas
he is safe in the impersonality of—So it is
said—or—So it is reported.”

“ How I should like to sée a meeting be-
tween two perfectly finished diplomatists !”
cried Lady Geraldine.

“ That is demonstrably impossible,” said
Mr. Devereux; “ for in certain political, as
well as in certain geometrical lines, there is
a continual effort to approach, without a
possibility of meeting.”

Lady Geraldine’s raillery, like all other
things, would, perhaps, soon have become
tiresome to me ; but that there was infinite
variety in her humour. At first I had

thought her merely superficial, and intent
solely upon her own amusement; but I soon
found that she had a taste for literature,
beyond what could have been expected in
one who lived so dissipated a life; a depth
of reflection that seemed inconsistent with
the rapidity with which she thought; and,
above all, a degree of generous indignation
against meanness and vice, which seemed
incompatible with the selfish character of a
fine lady, and which appeared quite in-
comprehensible to the imitating tribe of her
fashionable companions.

I mentioned a Mrs. Norton and Lady
Hauton amongst the company at Ormsby
Villa. These two English ladies, whom I
had never met in any of the higher circles
in London, who were persons of no conse-
quence, and of no marked character in their
own country, made, it seems, a prodigious
sensation when they came over to Ireland,
and turned the heads of half Dublin by the
extravagance of their dress, the imperti-
nence of their airs, and the audacity of their
conduct. Fame flew before them to the re-
mote parts of the country, and when they
arrived at Ormsby Villa, all the country

gentlemen and ladies were prepared to ad-
mire these celebrated fashionable belles. All
worshipped them present, and abused them
absent, except Lady Geraldine, who neither
joined in the admiration, nor inquired into
the scandal. One morning Mrs. Norton
and Lady Hauton had -each collected her
votaries round her. One group begging
patterns of dress from Lady Hauton, who
stood up in the midst of them, to have every
thing she wore examined and envied. The
other group sat on a sofa apart, listening to
Mrs. Norton, who, sottovcce, was telling
interesting anecdotes of an English crim.
con., which then occupied the attention of
the fashionable world. Mrs. Norton had
letters from the best authorities in Lon-
don, which she was entreated by her audi-
tors to read to them. Mrs. Norton went
to look for the letters, Lady Hauton to di-
rect her woman to furnish some patterns of
I know not what articles of dress : and* in
the mean time, all the company joined in
canvassing the merits and demerits of the
dress and characters of the two ladies who
had just left the room. Lady Geraldine,
who had kept aloof, and who was examin-

mg some prints at the farther end of the
room, at this instant laid down her book,
and looked upon the whole party with an
air of magnanimous disdain ; then smiling,
as in scorn, she advanced towards them,
and, in a tone of irony, addressing one of
the Swadlinbar graces :

“ My dear Theresa,” said her ladyship,
“ you are absolutely ashamed, I see, of not
being quite naked; and you, my good Bess,
will, no doubt, very soon be equally scandal-
ized, at the imputation of being a perfectly
modest woman. Go on, my friends; go
on, and prosper ; beg and borrow all the
patterns and precedents you can collect of
the newest fashions of folly and vice. Make
haste, make haste; they don’t reach our re-
mote island fast enough. We, Irish, might
live in innocence half a century longer, if
yon didn’t expedite the progress of profli-
gacy ; we might escape the plague that
rages in neighbouring countries, if we didn’t,
without any quarantine, and with open
arms, welcome every suspected stranger ; if
we didn’t encourage the importation of
whole bales of tainted fineries, that will

spread the contagion from Dublin to Cork,
and from Cork to Galway !”

“ La !” said Miss Ormsby, “ how severe
your ladyship is ; and all only for one’s ask-
ing for a pattern ?”

“ But you know,” pursued Mrs. O’Con-
nor, cc that Lady Geraldine is too proud to
take pattern from any body.”

“ Too proud am I ? Well, then, I’ll be
humble ; I’ll abase myself—shall I ?

* Proud as I am. I’ll put myself to school
and I’ll do what the Ladies Hauton and
Norton shall ad vise, to heighten my charms
and preserve my reputation. I must begin,
must not I, Mrs. O’Connor, by learning
not to blush ? for I observed you were
ashamed for me yesterday at dinner, when
I blushed at something said by one of our
fair missionaries. Then, to whatever lengths
flirtations and gallantry may go between
unmarried or married people, I must look
on. I may shut my eyes, if I please, and
look down ; but not from shame—from af-
fectation I may as often as I please, or to
show my eye-lashes.	Memorandum—to

practise this before Clementina Ormsby, my
mirror of fashion. So far, so good, for my

looks; but now for my language. I must
reform my barbarous language, and learn
from Mrs. Norton, with her pretty accom-
modating voice, to call an intrigue an ar-
rangement y and a crim. con. an affair in
Doctor s Commons, or that business before the
Lords. As to adultery, it is an odious word 5
found only in the prayer book, and fit only
for our gross grandmothers.

' We never mention Hell to ears polite.’

“ How virtuous we shall be when we have
II0 name for vice ! But stay, I must mind
my lessons—I have more, much more to
learn. From the dashing Lady Hauton I
may learn, if my head be but strong, and
my courage intrepid enough, c to touch
the brink of all we hate,’ without tumbling
headlong into the gulf. And from the in-
teresting Mrs. Norton, as I hear it whis-
pered amongst you ladies, I may learn how,
with the assistance of a humane society, to
save a half-drowned reputation. It is, I
understand, the glory of one class of fashion-
able females, to seem worse than they are ;
and of another class the privilege, to be
worse than they seem.”

Here clamorous voices interrupted Lady
Geraldine—some justifying, some attacking
Lady Hauton and Mrs. Norton.

<c O ! Lady Geraldine, I assure you,
notwithstanding all that was said about

General----------and	Mrs.	Norton, I tun

convinced there was nothing in it.”

“ And, my dear Lady Geraldine, though
Lady Hauton does go great lengths in co-
quetting with a certain lord, you must see
that there’s nothing ivrong ; and that she
means nothing, but to provoke his lady's
jealousy. You know his lordship is not a
man to fall in love with.”

“ So, because Lady Hauton's passion is
hatred instead of love, and because her sole
object is to give pain to a poor wife, and to
make mischief in families, all her sins are
to be forgiven. Now, if I were forced to
forgive any ill-conducted female, I would
rather excuse the woman who is hurried
on by love, than she who is instigated by
hatred.”

Miss Bland now began to support her
ladyship’s opinion, that “ Lady Hauton
was much the worst of the two j” and all
the scandal that was in circulation was

produced by the partisans of each of these
ladies.

<c No matter, no matter, which is the
worst,” cried Lady Geraldine; " don't let
us waste our time in repeating or verifying
scandalous stories of either of them. I have
no enmity to these ladies ; I only despise
them, or, rather, their follies and their faults.
It is not the sinner, but ihe sin we should
reprobate. O ! my dear countrywomen,”
cried Lady Geraldine, with increasing ani-
mation of countenance and manner—fc O !
my dear countrywomen, let us never stoop
to admire and imitate these second-hand
airs and graces, follies and vices. Let us
dare to be ourselves.”

My eyes were fixed upon her animated
countenance, and, I believe, I continued
gazing even after her voice ceased. Mrs.
O’Connor pointed this out, and I was im-
mediately embarrassed. Miss Bland ac-
counted for my embarrassment by suppos-
ing, that what Lady Geraldine had said of
English crim. cons, had affected me. From
a look and a whisper among the Ihdies I
guessed this ; but Lady Geraldine was too
well bred to suppose I could suspect her of

ill-breeding and ill-nature, or that I could
apply to myself what evidently was not im
tended to allude to my family misfortunes.
By an openness of manner, and sweetness
of expression, which I cannot forget, she,
in one single look, conveyed all this to me :
and then resuming her conversation—

“ Pray, my lord,” said she, “ you who
have lived so much in the great world in
England, say, for you can, whether I am
right or wrong in my suspicion, that these
ladies, who have made such a noise in Ire-
land, have been little heard of in Eng-
land?”

I confirmed her ladyship’s opinion by
my evidence. The faces of the company
changed. Thus, in a few seconds, the em-
pire of Lady H au ton and of Mrs. Norton
seemed shaken to the foundation, and never
recovered from this shock.

The warmth of Lady Geraldine’s expres-
sions on this, and many other occasions,
wakened dormant feelings in my heart, and
made me sensible that I had a soul, and
that I was superior to the puppets, with
whom I had been classed.

One day. Lady Kilrush, in her mixed

mode, with partly the graces of a fine lady,
and partly the airs of a bel-esprit> was talk-
ing of Mr. Devereux, whom she affected
to patronise and produce.

cc Here, Devereux!” cried she, “ Cecil
Devereux ! What can you be thinking of?
I am talking to you. Here’s this epitaph
of Francis the First upon Petrarch’s Laura,
that you showed me the other day : do you
know, I doat upon it ; I must have it trans-
lated : nobody can do it so well as you :
I have not time 5 but I shall not sleep to
night if it is not done : and you are so
quick; so sit down here, there’s a dear
man, and do it in your elegant way for me,
whilst I go to my toilette. Perhaps you
did not know that my name was Laura,”
said she, leaving the room with a very sen-
timental air.

cc What will become of me!” cried De-
vereux. “ Never was a harder task set
by cruel patroness. I would rather turn a
Persian tale for half a crown. Read this,
my lord, and tell me whether it will be easy
to turn my Lady Kilrush into Petrarch’s
Laura.”

“ This sonnet, to be sure, is rather diffi-

cult to translate, or at least to modernize, as
bespoke,” said Lady Geraldine, after she
had perused the sonnet * ; “ but I think,
Mr. Devereux, you brought this difficulty
upon yourself. How came you to show
these lines to such an amateur, such a
fetcher and carrier of bays, as Lady Kil-
rush ?”

<c You might have been certain, that,
had they been trash, with the name of
Francis the First, and with your fashion-
able approbation, and something to say
about Petrarch and Laura, my Lady Kil-
rush would talk for ever, et se pâmerait
d’affectation.”

“ Mr. Devereux,” said I, “ has only to
abide by the last lines, as a good and suffi-
cient apology to Lady Kilrush for his si-
lence:

* * En petit compris vous pouvez voir
Ce qui comprend beaucoup par renommé,
Plume, labeur, la langue, et le devoir
Furent vaincus par l'amant de l’aimée.

O gentille ame, étant toute estimée!

Qui te pourra louer qu'en se taisant ?

Car la parole est toujours réprimée
Quand le sujet surmonte le disant.'

( Qui te pourra louer qu’en se taisant ?

*	Car la parole est toujours réprimée

*	Quand le sujet surmonte le disant;/

“ There is no way to get out of my dif-
ficulties,” said Mr* Devereux, with a very
melancholy look ; and, with a deep sigh,
he sat down to‘ attempt-the translation of
the poem. In a few minutes, however, he
rose and left the room, declaring that he
had the bad habit of not being able to do
any thing in company.

Lady Geraldine now, with much energy
of indignation, exclaimed against the pre-
tensions of rich amateurs, and the mean
and presumptuous manner in which some
would-be-great people affect to patronise
genius.

“ O ! the baseness, the emptiness of
such patronising ostentation!” cried she.
(e I am accused of being proud myself;
but I hope—I believe—I am sure, that my
pride is of another sort. Persons of any
elevation or generosity of mind never have
this species of pride; but it is-your mean,
second-rate folk, who imagine that people
of talents are a sort of raree-show for their
entertainment. At best, they consider men

of genius only as artists formed for their
use, who, if not in a situation to be paid
with money, are yet to be easily recom-
pensed by praise—by their praise—their
praise ! Heavens ! what conceit ! And these
amateur-patrons really think themselves
judges, and presume to advise and direct
genius, and employ it to their petty •pur-
poses I Like that Piedro de Medicis, who,
at some of his entertainments, set Michael
Angelo to make a statue of snow. My
lord, did you ever happen to meet with les
Mémoires de Madame de Staël ?”

“ No; I did not know that they were
published.”

“ You mistake me : I mean Madame de
Staël of Lewis the Fourteenth and the Re-
gent’s time. Mademoiselle de Launay.”

I had never heard of such a person, and
I blushed for my ignorance.

<c Nay, I met with them myself only
yesterday,” said Lady Geraldine : “ I was
struck with the character of the Duchesse
de la Ferté, in which this kind of proud pa-
tronising ignorance is admirably painted
from the life. It is really worth your while,
my lord, to look at it. There’s the book

on that little table; here is tiie passage.
You see, this Duchesse de la Ferté is show-
ing off to a sister duchess a poor girl of
genius, like a puppet or an ape.”

' Allons mademoiselle, parlez—Madame,
vous allez voir comme elle parle—Elle vit
que j’hésitois à repondre, et pensa qu’il
falloit m’aider comme une chanteuse à qui
l’on indique ce qu’on désire d’entendre—
Parlez un peu de religion, mademoiselle,
vous direz ensuite autre chose.’

<c This speech, Mr. Devereux tells me,
has become quite proverbial in Paris,” con-
tinued Lady Geraldine ; “ and it is often
quoted, when any one presumes in the
Duchesse de Ferté’s style.”

<c Ignorance, either in high or low life, is
equally self-sufficient, I believe,” said I, ex-
erting myself to illustrate her ladyship’s re-
marks. cc A gentleman of my acquaint-
ance lately went to buy some razors at
Packwood’s. Mrs. PackwTood alone wras
visible. Upon the gentleman’s compliment-
ing her on the infinite variety of her hus-
band’s ingenious and poetical advertise-
ments, she replied, ‘ La! sir, and do you
think husband has time to write them there

things his-self? Why, sir, we keeps a poet
to do all that there work.* ”

Though Lady Geraldine spoke only in
general of amateur-patrons, and of men of
genius, yet I could not help fancying, from
the warmth with which she expressed her-
self, and from her dwelling on the subject
so long, that her feelings were peculiarly
interested for some individual of this de-
scription. Thus I discovered, that Lady
Geraldine had a heart; and I suspected,
that her ladyship and Mr. Devereux had
also made the same discovery. This sus-
picion was strengthened by a slight inci-
dent which occurred the following evening.

Lady Geraldine and Cecil Devereux, as
we were drinking coffee, were in a recessed
window, while some of the company stood
round them, amused by their animated con-
versation. They went on repartee after re-
partee, as if inspired by each other’s spirits.

“ You two,” said a little girl of six years
old, who was playing in the window, “ go
on singing to one another like two nightin-
gales ; and this shall be your cage,” added
she, drawing the drapery of the window
curtains across the recessed window. “ You

shall live always together in this cage: will
you, pretty birds ?”

“No, no; some birds cannot live in a
cage, my dear,” cried Lady Geraldine, play-
fully struggling to get free, whilst the child
held her prisoner.

“ Mr. Devereux seems tolerably quiet
and contented in his cage,” said the shrewd
Mrs. O’Connor.

“ I can’t get out ! I can’t get out !” cried
Devereux, in the melancholy tone of the
Starling in the Sentimental Journey.

cc What is all this?” said my Lady Kil-
dangan, sailing up to us.

“ Only two birds,” the child began.

“ Singing birds,” interrupted Lady Ge-
raldine, catching the little girl up in her
arms, and stopping her from saying more,
by beginning to sing most charmingly.

Lady Kildangan returned to the sofa with-
out comprehending one word of what had
passed. For my part, I now felt almost
certain of the justice of my suspicions : I
was a little vexed, but not by any means in
that despair into which a man heartily in
love would have been thrown by such a dis-
covery.

Well, thought I, it is well it is no worse :
it was very lucky, that I did not fall quite
in love with this fair lady, since, it seems,
that she has given her heart away. But
am I certain of this ? I was mistaken once.
Let me examine more carefully.

Now I had a new motive to keep my at-
tention awake.

CHAPTER XI.

To preserve the continuity of my story, and
not to fatigue the reader with the journals
of my comings and goings from Ormsby
Villa to Glenthorn Castle, and from Glen-
thorn Castle to Ormsby Villa, I must here
relate the observations I made, and the in-
cidents that occurred, during various visits
at Sir Harry Ormsby’s, in the course of the
summer.

After the incident of the birds and cage,
my sagacity was for some time at a fault.
I could not perceive any further signs of in-
telligence between the parties : on the con-
trary, all communication seemed abruptly
to cease. As I was not well versed in such
affairs, this quieted my suspicions, and I
began to think, that I had been entirely
mistaken. Cecil Devereux spent his days
shut up in his own apartment, immersed,
as far as I could understand, in the study
of the Persian language. He talked to me

of nothing but his hopes of an appointment,
which Lord O’Toole had promised to pro-
cure for him, in India. When he was not
studying, he was botanizing or mineralo-
gizing with O’Toole’s chaplain. I did not
envy him his new mode of life. Lady Ge-
raldine took no notice of it. When they
did meet, which happened as seldom as
possible, there was an air of haughty dis-
pleasure on her part ; on his, steady and
apparently calm respect and self-satisfac-
tion. Her spirits were exuberant, but va-
riable ; and, at times, evidently forced :
his were not high, but even and certain.
Towards me, her ladyship’s manners were
free from coquetry, yet politely gratifying,
as she marked, by the sort of conversation
she addressed to me, her opinion that I was
superior in ability and capability to what
she had at first thought me, and to what I
had always thought myself.

Mr. Devereux, though with more effort,
treated me with distinction, and showed a
constant desire to cultivate my friendship.
On every occasion he endeavoured to raise
my opinion of myself; to give me ambition
and courage to cultivate my mind. Once,

when I was arguing in favour of natural ge-
nius, and saying, that I thought no culti-
vation could make the abilities of one man
equal to those of another, he, without seem-
ing to perceive that I was apologizing at
once for my own indolence and my intel-
lectual inferiority, answered in general
terms :—

tc It is difficult to judge what are the na-
tural powers of the mind, they appear so
different in different circumstances. You
can no more judge of a mind in ignorance,
than of a plant in darkness. A philoso-
phical friend told me, that he once thought
he had discovered a new and strange plant
growing in a mine. It was common sage,
but so degenerated and altered, that he
could not know it : he planted it in the open
air and in the light, and gradually it re-
sumed its natural appearance and cha-
racter.”

Mr. Devereux excited, without fatiguing
my mind by his conversation ; and I was
not yet sufficiently in love to be seriously
jealous. I was resolved, however, to sound
him upon the subject of Lady Geraldine.
I waited for a good opportunity ; at length.

as we were looking together over the prints
of Buerger’s Lenore, he led to the sort of
conversation that I desired, by telling me
an anecdote relative to the poet, which he
had lately heard from a German baron.

Buerger was charmed with a sonnet,
which an unknown fair one addressed to
him, in praise of his poetry : he replied in
equal strains ; and they went on flattering
one another, till both believed themselves
in love : without ever having met, they de-
termined to marry: they at length met and
married : they quarrelled and parted : in
other words, the gentleman was terribly
disappointed in his unknown mistress, and
she consoled herself by running away from
him with another lover. The imprudence
of this poetic couple led us to reflections on
love and marriage in general. Keeping far
away from all allusion to Lady Geraldine,
I rallied Mr. Devereux about the fair Cle-
mentina, who was evidently a romantic ad-
mirer of his.

“ Who, except Cupid, would barter his
liberty for a butterfly?” said he; cc and
Cupid was a child. Men now-a-days are
grown too wise to enslave themselves for

women. Love occupies a vast space in a
woman’s thoughts, but fills a small portion
of a man’s life. Women are told, that
c The great, th’ important business of their
life, is love;’ but men know, that they are
born for something better than to sing
mournful ditties to a mistress’s eyebrow.
As to marriage, what a serious, terrible
thing ! Some quaint old author says, that
man is of too smooth and oily a nature to
climb up to Heaven, if, to make him less
slippery, there be not added to his composi-
tion the vinegar of marriage. This may be;
but I will keep as long as possible from the
vinegar.”

“ Really, Devereux,” said I, smiling,
“ you talk so like a cynic and an old ba-
chelor, and you look so little like either,
that it is quite ridiculous.”

“ A man must be ridiculous sometimes,”
said he, “ and bear to be thought so. No
man ever distinguished himself, who could
not bear to be laughed at.”

Mr. Devereux left the room singing,

" No more for Amynta fresh garlands I wove,

,f Ambition, I said, will soon cure rae of love.”

I was uncertain what to think of all this.
I inclined to believe, that ambition was his
ruling passion, notwithstanding the descrip-
tion of that Hell which he showed me in
Spencer. His conduct to his patron lords,
by which à surer judgement of his character
could be formed than by his professions/
was not, however, that of a man merely in-
tent upon rising in the world.

I remember once hearing Lord O’Toole
attack a friend of this gentleman’s, calling
him, in a certain tone, a philosopher. Mr.
Devereux replied, cc that he could not con-
sider that as a term of reproach : that where
a false or pretended philosopher was meant,
some other name should be used, equivalent
to the Italian term of reproach jilosofastro”
Lord O’Toole would by no means admit
of this Italianism : he would make no dis-
tinctions : he deemed philosophers alto-
gether a race of beings dangerous and ini-
mical to states.

<c For states read statesmen,” said Deve-
reux, who persisted in the vindication of
his friend, till Lord O'Toole grew pale with
anger, whilst Lord Craiglethorpe smiled

with ineffable contempt at the political bé-
vue : Lady Geraldine glowed with generous
indignation.

Afterwards, in speaking to me of Lord
O’Toole, Devereux said, tc His lordship’s
classification of men is as contracted as the
savage’s classification of animals : he divides
mankind into two classes, knaves and fools ;
and when he meets with an honest man, he
does not know what to make of him.”

My esteem for Air. Devereux was much
increased by my daily observations upon his
conduct : towards Lady Geraldine I thought
it particularly honourable : when her dis-
pleasure evidently merged in esteem ; when
her manners again became most winning
and attractive, his continued uniformly thé
same, never passing the bounds of friendly
respect, or swerving, in the slightest degree,
from the line of conduct, which he had laid
down for himself. I thought I now under-
stood him perfectly. That he liked Lady
Geraldine I could scarcely doubt; but I
saw, that he refrained from aiming at the
prize, which he knew he ought not to ob-
tain : that he perceived her ladyship’s fa-
vourable disposition towards him, yet de-

nied himself not only the gratification of his
vanity, but the exquisite pleasure of con-
versing with her, lest he should stand in the
way of her happier prospects. He fre-
quently spoke to me of her ladyship in
terms of the warmest approbation. He said,
that “ all the world saw and admired her
talents and beauty, but that he had had
opportunities, as a relation, of studying her
domestic life. With all her vivacity, she
has a heart formed for tenderness,” said he,
“ a high sense of duty, the best security for
a woman’s conduct 3 and in generosity and
magnanimity, I never found her superior
in either sex. In short, I never saw any
woman, whose temper and disposition were
more likely to make a man of sense and
feeling supremely happy.”

I could not forbear smiling, and asking
Cecil Devereux how all this accorded with
his late professions of hatred to marriage.

“ My professions were sincere,” said he.
“ It would be misery to me to marry any
inferior woman, and I am not in circum-
stances to marry as I could wish. I could
not think of Lady Geraldine, without a
breach of trust, of which your lordship, I

hope, cannot suspect me. Her mother
places confidence in me. I am not only a
relation, but treated as a friend of the fa-
mily. I am not in love with Lady Ge-
raldine. I admire, esteem, respect her la-
dyship ; and I wish to see her united to a
man, if such a man there be, who may de-
serve her. We understand one another
now. Your lordship will have the good-
ness never more to speak to me on this sub-
ject.” He spoke with much emotion, but
with steadiness, and left me penetrated with
feelings, that were entirely new to me.

Much as I admired his conduct, I was
yet undecided as to my own ; my aversion
to a second marriage was not yet con-
quered : I was amused, I was captivated by
Lady Geraldine, but I could not bring my-
self to think of making a distinct proposal.
Lord Craiglethorpe himself was not more
afraid of being committed, than I ivas upon
this tender subject. To gain time, I now
thought it necessary to verify all the praises
Mr. Devereux had bestowed on her lady-
ship. Magnanimity was a word, that par-
ticularly struck my ear as extraordinary
when applied to a female. However, by

attending carefully to this lady, I thought
I discovered what Mr. Devereux meant.
Lady Geraldine was superior to manoeu-
vring little arts, and petty stratagems, to
attract attention. She would not stoop,
even to conquer. From gentlemen she
seemed to expect attention as her right, as
the right of her sex ; not to beg or accept
of it as a favour: if it were not paid, she
deemed the gentleman degraded, not her-
self. Far from being mortified by any pre-
ference shown to other ladies, her counte-
nance betrayed only a sarcastic sort of pity
for the bad taste of the men, or an absolute
indifference and look of haughty absence.
I saw that she beheld with disdain the pal-
try competitions of the young ladies her
companions: as her companions, indeed,
she hardly seemed to consider them ; she
tolerated their foibles, forgave their envy,
and never exerted any superiority, except
to show her contempt of vice and meanness.
To be in any degree excepted from the
common herd; to be in any degree distin-
guished by a lady so proud, and with so
many good reasons to he proud, was flat-
tering to my self-love. She gave me no di-

rect encouragement ; but I never advanced
far enough to require encouragement, much
less to justify repulse. Sometimes I ob-
served, or I fancied, that she treated me
with more favour when Mr. Devereux w^as
present, than at other times ; perhaps, for
she was a woman, not an angel—to pique
Devereux, and try if she could move him
from the settled purpose of his soul. He
bore it all with surprising constancy ; his
spirits, however, and his health, began vi-
sibly to decline.

“ If I do not intrude too much on your
valuable time, Mr. Devereux/’ said her
ladyship to him one evening, in her most
attractive manner, “ may I beg you to read
to us some of these beautiful poems of Sir
William Jones ?”

There was a seat beside her ladyship on
the sofa : the book w7as held out by the finest
arm in the world.

“ Nay,” said Lady Geraldine, “ do not
look so respectfully miserable ; if you have
any other engagements, you have only to
say so; or if you cannot speak, you may
bow : a bow, you know, is an answer to
every thing. And here is my Lord Glen-

thorn ready to supply your place: pray,
do not let me detain you prisoner. You
shall not a second time say, J can't get
out.”

Devereux made no further effort to
escape, but took the book and his danger-
ous seat. He remained with us, contrary
to his custom, the whole evening. After-
wards, as if he felt that some apology was
necessary to me for the pleasure in which
he had indulged himself,

“ Perhaps, my lord,” said he, “ another
man in my situation, and with my feelings,
would think it necessary to retreat, and
prudent to secure his safety by flight ; but
flight is unworthy of him who can combat
and conquer : the man, who is sure of him-
self, does not sculk away to avoid danger,
but advances to meet it, armed secure in
honesty.”

This proud and rash security in his own
courage, strength of mind, and integrity,
was the only fault of Cecil Devereux. He
never prayed not to be led into temptation,
he thought himself so sure of avoiding evil.
Unconscious of his danger, even though
his disease was at its height, he now braved

it most imprudently : he was certain, that
he should never pass the bounds of friend-
ship ; he had proved this to himself, and
was satisfied: he told me, that he could
with indifference, nay, with pleasure, see
Lady Geraldine mine. In the mean time,
upon the same principle that he deemed
flight inglorious, he was proud to expose
himself to the full force of Love's artillery.
He was with us now every day, and almost
all day, and Lady Geraldine was more
charming than ever. The week was fixed
for her departure. Still I could not decide.
I understood that her ladyship would pass
the ensuing winter in Dublin, where she

woulvl	meet	with	nCW	atlorCTS	J

and even if Mr. Devereux should not suc-
ceed, some adventurous knight might win
and wear the prize. This was an alarming
thought. It almost decided me to hazard
the fatal declaration : but then I recollect-
ed, that I might follow her ladyship to
town the next winter, and that if the im-
pression did not, as might be hoped, w'ear
off during the intervening autumn, it w^ould
be time enough to commit myself, when I
should meet my fair one in Dublin. This

was at last my fixed resolution. Respited
from the agonies of doubt, I now waited
very tranquilly for that moment, to which
most lovers look forward with horrour, the
moment of separation. I was sensible that
I had accustomed myself to think about
this lady so much, that I had gradually
identified my existence with hers, and I
thus found my spirit of animation much in-
creased. I dreaded the departure of Lady
Geraldine less than the return of ennui.

In this frame of mind I was walking one
morning in the pleasure-grounds with Lady
Geraldine, when a slight accident made me
act in direct contradiction to all my résolu-
tions, and, I think, inenrmist.pntly with my
character. But such is the nature of man !
and I was doomed to make a fool of my-
self, even in the very temple of Minerva.
Among the various ornamental buildings
in the grounds at Ormsby Villa, there was
a temple dedicated to this goddess, from
which issued a troop of hoyden young la-
dies, headed by the widow O’Connor and
Lady Kilrush, all calling to us to come and
look at some charming discovery, which
they had just made in the Temple of Mi-

nerv-a. Thither we proceeded, accompa-
nied by the merry troop. We found in the
temple only a poetical inscription of Lady
Kilrush’s, pompously engraved on a fine
marble tablet. We read the lines with all
the attention usually paid to a lady’s poetry
in the presence of the poetess. Lady Ge-
raldine and I turned to pay some compli-
ments on the performance, when we found
that Lady Kilrush, and all her companions,
were gone.

“ Gone! all gone!” said Lady Gerald-
ine, £C and there they are, making their
way very fast down to the Temple of Folly !
Lady Kilrush, you know, is so ba-a-ashful,
she could not possibly stay to receive nos
hommages. I love to laugh at affectation.
Call them back, do, my lord, and you shall
see the fail' author go through all the evo-
lutions of mock humility, and end by yield-
ing quietly to the notion that she is the
tenth muse. But run, my lord, or they
will be out of our reach.”

I never was seen to run on any occasion,
but, to obey Lady Geraldine, I walked as
fast as I could to the door, and, to my sur-
prise, found it fastened.

“ Locked, I declare I some of the witty
tricks of the widow O’Connor, or the hoy-
den Miss Callwell’s !”

“ How I hate hoydens!” cried Lady Ge-
raldine ; “ but let us take patience, they
will be back presently. If young ladies
must perform practical jokes, because quiz-
zing is the fashion, I wish they would de-
vise something new. This locking-up is
so stale a jest. To be sure it has lately to
boast the authority of high rank in suc-
cessful practice : but these bungling imita-
tors never distinguish between cases the
most dissimilar imaginable. Silly creatures!
We have only to be wise and patient.”

Her ladyship sat down to reperuse the
tablet. I never saw her look so beautiful.
—The dignified composure of her manner
charmed me; it was so unlike the paltry
affectation of some of the fashionable ladies
by whom I had been disgusted. I recol-
lected the precedent to which she alluded.
I recollected, that the locking-up ended in
matrimony, and as Lady Geraldine made
some remarks upon the verses, I suppose
my answers showed my absence of mind.

Why so grave, my lord ï why so ab-

sent ? I assure you I do not suspect your
lordship of having any hand in this vulgar
manoeuvre. I acquit you honourably,
therefore you need not stand any longer
like a criminal.”

What decided me at this instant I can-
not positively tell : whether it was the
awkwardness of my own situation, or the
grace of her ladyship's manner, but all my
prudential arrangements were forgotten, all
my doubts vanished. Before I knew that
the words passed my lips, I replied, “ That
her ladyship did me justice by such an ac-
quittal ; but that, though I had no part in
the contrivance, yet I felt irresistibly im-
pelled to avail myself of the opportunity it
afforded of declaring my real sentiments.”
I was at her ladyship's feet, and making
very serious love, before I knew where I
was. In what words my long-delayed de-
claration was made I cannot recollect, but
I well remember Lady Geraldine’s answer.

“ My lord, I assure you, that you do
not know what you are saying: you do not
know what you are doing. This is all a
mistake, as you will find half an hour

hence. I will not be so cruelly vain as to
suppose you serious.’’

“ Not serious! no man ever was more
serious.”

“ No, no—No, no, no.”

I swore, of course, most fervently.

“ O ! rise, rise I beseech you, my lord,
and don’t look so like a hero ; though you
have done an heroical action, I grant. How
you ever brought yourself to it I cannot
imagine. But now, for your comfort, you
are safe—Vous voila quitte pour la peur !
Do not, however, let this encourage you to
venture again in the same foolish manner.
I know but few, very few young ladies, to
whom Lord Glenthorn could offer himself
with any chance or reasonable hope of
being refused. So take warning: never
again expect to meet with such another as
my whimsical self.”

ct Never, never, can I expect to meet
with any thing resembling your charming
s'elf,” cried I. This was a new text for a
lover’s rhapsody. It is not necessary, and
might not be generally interesting, to repeat
all the ridiculous things I said, even if I
could remember them.

Lady Geraldine listened to me, and then
very calmly replied—

“ Granting you believe all that you are
saying at this minute, which I must grant
from common gratitude, and still more,
common vanity ; nevertheless, permit me
to assure you, my lord, that this is not love,
it is only a fancy—only the nettlerash, not
the plague. You will not die this time. I will
insure your life. So now jump out of the
window as fast as you can, and unlock the
door—you need not be afraid of breaking
your neck—you know your life is insured.
Come, take the lover’s leap, and get rid of
your passion at once.”

I grew angry.

“ Only a cloud,” said Lady Geraldine—
“ it will blow over.”

I became more passionate—I did not
know the force of my own feelings, till they
met with an obstacle ; they suddenly rose
to a surprising height.

“ Now, my lord,” cried Lady Gerald-
ine, with a tone and look of comic vexa-
tion, cc this is really the most provoking
thing imaginable j you have no idea how

you distress me, nor of what exquisite
pleasures you deprive me—all the pleasures
of coquetry; legitimate pleasures, in cer-
tain circumstances, as I am instructed to
think them by one of the first moral autho-
rities. There is a case—I quote from me-
mory, my lord, for my memory, like that of
most other people, on subjects where I am
deeply interested, is tolerably tenacious—
there is a case, says the best of fathers, in
his Legacy to the best of daughters—there
is a case where a woman may coquet justi-
fiably to the utmost verge which her con-
science will allow. It is where a gentleman
purposely declines making his addresses,
till such time as he thinks himself perfectly
sure of her consent. Now, my lord, if you
had had the goodness to do so, I might
have made this delightful case my own ;
and what charming latitude I might have
allowed my conscience ! But now, alas !
it is all over, and I must be as frank as you
have been, under pain of forfeiting what I
value more even than admiration—my own
good opinion.”

She paused, and was silent for a few mo-

ments; then suddenly changing her man-
ner, she exclaimed, in a serious energetic
tone,

“ Yes, I must, I will be sincere; let it
cost me what it may. I will be sincere.—
My lord, I never can be yours. My lord,
you will believe me, even from the effort
with which I speak 3” her voice softened,
and her face suffused with crimson, as
she spoke. “ I love another—my heart is
no longer in my own possession ; whether
it will ever be in my power, consistently
with my duty and his principles, to be
united with the man of my choice, is doubt-
ful—more than doubtful—but this is cer-
tain, that with such a prepossession, such
a conviction in my mind, I never could nor
ought to think of marrying any other per-
son.M

I pleaded, that however deserving of her
preference the object of her favour might
be, yet that if there were, as her own pru-
dence seemed to suggest, obstacles, render-
ing the probability of her union with that
person more than doubtful, it might be pos-
sible that her superior sense and strength
of mind, joined to the persevering affection

of another lover, who would spare no exer-
tions to render himself worthy of her, might,

perhaps, in time----

“ No, no,” said she, interrupting me ;
<c do not deceive yourself. I will not de-
ceive you. I give you no hopes that my
sentiments may change. I know my own
mind—it will not change. My attachment
is founded on the firm basis of esteem; my
affection has grown from the intimate know-
ledge of the principles and conduct of the
man I love. No other man, let his merits
be what they may, could have these advan-
tages in my opinion. And when I say
that the probability of our being united is
more than doubtful, I do not mean to de-
ny, that I have distant hope that change of
circumstances might render love and duty
compatible. Without hope I know love
cannot long exist. You see I do not talk
romantic nonsense to you. All that you
say of prudence, and time, and the effect
of the attentions of another admirer, would
be perfectly just and applicable, if my at-
tachment were a fancy of yesterday—if it
were a mere young lady’s commonplace
first love; but I am not a very young lady.

nor is this, though a first love, common-
place, I do not, you see, in the usual
style, tell you that the man I adore is an
angel, and that no created form ever did, or
ever can, resemble this angel in green and
gold, but on the contrary do justice to your
lordship’s merit; and believing, as I do,
that you are capable of a real love, still
more, believing that such an attachment
would rouse you to exertion, and bring to
life and light a surprising number of good
qualities, yet I should deceive you unpar-
don ably, fatally for my own peace of mind,
if not for yours, were I not frankly and de-
cidedly to assure you, that I never could
reward or return your affection. My at-
tachment to—I trust entirely where I trust
at all—my attachment to Mr. Devereux is
for life.” V

“ He deserves it—deserves it all,” cried
I, struggling for utterance ; “ that is as
much as a rival can say.”

“ Not more than I expected from you,
my lord.”

“ But your ladyship says there is hope
of duty and love being compatible. Would
Lady Kildangan ever consent?”

She looked much disturbed.

“ No, certainly not; unless—Lord O’
Toole has promised—not that I depend on
courtiers’ promises—but Lord O’Toole is a
relation of ours, and he has promised to ob-
tain an appointment abroad, in India, for
Mr. Devereux. If that were done, he might
appear of more consequence in the eyes of
the world. My mother might then, per-
haps, be propitious. My lord, I give you
the strongest proof of my esteem, by speak-
ing with such openness. I have had the
honour of your lordship’s acquaintance on-
ly a few months; but without compliment-
ing my own penetration, I may securely
trust to the judgment of Mr. Devereux,
and his example has taught me, to feel con-
fidence in your lordship. Your conduct
now will, I trust, justify my good opinion,
by your secrecy, and by desisting from
useless pursuit you will entitle yourself to
my esteem and gratitude. These, I pre-
sume, you will think worth securing.”

My soul was so completely touched, that
I could not articulate.

£C Mr. Devereux is right—I see, my lord,
that you have a soul that can be touched.”

A* Kissing hands ! I protest,” exclaimed
a shrill voice at the window; we turned
and saw Mrs. O’Connor, and a group of
tittering faces peeping in. “ Kissing
hands, after a good hour’s tête-à-tête ! O
pray, Lady Kildangan, make haste here,”
continued Mrs. O’Connor; “ make haste,
before Lady Geraldine’s blushes are over.”

“ Were you ever detected in the crime
of blushing, in your life, Mrs. O’Connor ?”
said I.

“ I never was found out locked up with
so fine a gentleman,” replied Mrs. O’Con-
nor.

“ Then it hurts your conscience only to
be found out, like all the rest of the vast
family of the Surfaces,” said Lady Gerald-
ine, resuming her spirit.

“ Found out !—Locked up !—Bless me !
bless me ! What is all this ?” cried Lady
Kildangan, puffing up the hill. cc For
shame! young ladies; for shame!” con-
tinued her ladyship, with a decent sup-
pression of her satisfaction, when she saw,
or thought she saw, how matters stood.
“ Unlock the door, pray. Don’t be vexed.

my Geraldine. Fie ! fie ! Mrs. O’Connor.
But quizzing is now so fashionable—no-
body can be angry with any body. My
Geraldine, consider we are all friends.”

The door unlocked, and, as we were go-
ing out. Lady Geraldine whispered to me :

“ For mercy’s sake, my lord, don’t
break my poor mother’s heart ! Never let
her know, that a coronet has been within
my grasp, and that I have not clutched it.”
Lady Kildangan, who thought that all
was now approaching that happy termina-
tion she so devoutly wished, was so full of
her own happy presentiments, that it was
impossible for me to undeceive her lady-
ship. Even when I announced before her,
to Sir Harry Ormsby, that I was obliged
to return home immediately on particular
business, she was, I am sure, persuaded
that I wras going to prepare matters for
marriage-settlements. When I mounted
my horse, Mr. Devereux pressed through a
crowd assembled on the steps at the hall-
door, and offered me his hand, with a look
and manner that seemed to say<—Have you
sufficient generosity to be still my friend ?

c< I know the value of your friendship, Mr.
Devereux,” said I, “ and I hope to deserve
it better every }rear that I live.”

For the effort which it cost me to say
this I was rewarded. Lady Geraldine,
who had retired behind her companions,
at this instant approached with an air of
mingled grace and dignity, bowed her
head, and gave me a smile of grateful ap-
probation. This is the last image left on
my mind, the last look of the charming Ge-
raldine—I never saw her again.

After I got home, I never shaved for two
days, and scarcely ever spoke. I should
have taken to my bed to avoid seeing any
human creature, but I knew, that if I de-
clared myself ill, no power would keep my
old nurse, Ellinor, from coming to moan
over me; and I was not in a humour to
listen to stories of the Irish Black Beard,
or the ghost of King O’Donoghoe ; nor
could I, however troublesome, have re-
pulsed the simplicity of her affection. In-
stead of going to bed, therefore, I conti-
nued to lie stretched upon a sofa, rumi-
nating sweet and bitter thoughts, after giv-
ing absolute orders, that I should not be

disturbed on any account whatever. Whilst
I was in this state of reverie, one of my ser-
vants, an odd Irish fellow, who, under pre-
tence of being half-witted, took more liber-
ties than his companions, bolted into my
presence.

“ Plase your lordship, I thought it my
duty, in spite of ’em all below, to come up
to advertise your lordship of the news that’s
going through the country. That they
are all upside down at Ormsby Villa, all
mad entirely—fighting and setting off
through the kingdom, every one their own
way; and, they say, it’s all on account of
something that Miss Clemmy Ormsby told,
that Lady Geraldine said about my Lord
O’Toole’s being no better, than a cat’s paw,
or something that way, which made his
lordship quite mad ; and he said, in the
presence of Lord Craiglethorpe, and my
Lady Kildangan, and Lady Geraldine, and
all that were in it, something that vexed
Lady Geraldine, which made Mr. Cecil
Devereux mad next, and he said something
smart in reply, that Lord O’Toole could
not digest he said, which made his lordship
madder than ever, and he discharged Mr.

Devereux from his favour, and he is not to
get that place that was vacant, the Lord
Lieutenancy of some place in the Indies
that he was to have had 3 this made Lady
Geraldine mad, and it was found out she
was in love with Mr. Devereux, which
made her mother mad, the maddest of all
they say, so that none can hold her, and
she is crying night and day how her daugh-
ter might have had the first coronet in the
kingdom, mailing you, my lord, if it had
not been that she had preferred a beggar-
man, maning Mr. Cecil Devereux, who is
as poor, they say, as a Connaughtman—
and he’s forbid to think of her, and she's
forbid, under pain of bread and water, ever
to set her eyes upon him the longest day
ever she lives 5 so the horses and coaches
are ordered, and they are all to be off with
the first light for Dublin 3 and that’s all,
my lard, and all truth, not a word of lies
I’m telling.”

I was inclined not to credit a story so
oddly told 3 but, upon inquiry, I found it
true in its material points. My own words
to Mr. Devereux, and the parting look of

Lady Geraldine, were full in my recollec-
tion ; I was determined, by an unexpected
exertion, to surprise both the lovers, and to
secure for ever their esteem and gratitude.
The appointment, which Mr. Devereux de-
sired, was not yet given away ; the fleet
was to sail in a few days. I started up
from my sofa—ordered my carriage in-,
stantly—shaved myself—sent a courier on
before to have horses ready at every stage
to carry me to Dublin—got there in the
shortest time possible—found Lord O’Toole
but just arrived. Though unused to diplo-
matic language and political négociation, I
knew pretty well on what they all hinge. I
went directly to the point, and showed,
that it would be the interest of the party
concerned, to grant my request. By ex-
pressing a becoming desire, that my bo-
roughs, upon a question where a majority
was desired, should strengthen the hands of
government, I obtained for my friend the
favour he deserved. Before I quitted Lord
O’Toole, his secretary, Captain Andrews,
was instructed to write a letter announcing
to Mr. Devereux his appointment. A copy

of the former letter of refusal now lay be-
fore me ; it was in his lordship’s purest di-
plomatic style—as follows :

Private.

“ Lord O’Toole is concerned to inform
fC Mr. Devereux, that he cannot feel him-
“ self justified in encouraging Mr. D., un-
“ der the existing circumstances, to make
“ any direct application relative to the last
<c conversation his lordship had the honour
“ to hold with Mr. Devereux.”

To Cecil Devereux, Esq.	Thursday______

The letter which I obtained, and of which
I took possession, ran as follows :

Private.

<c Lord O’Toole is happy to have it in
“ command to inform Air. Devereux, that
“ his lordship’s representations on the sub-
ject of their last conversation have been
“ thought sufficient, and that an official no-
“ tification of the appointment to India,
“ which Mr. D. desired, will meet the
“ wishes of Mr. Devereux.

“ Captain Andrews has the honour to
“ add his congratulations.”

To Cecil Devereux, Esq.

&c.

Thursday

Having dispatched this business with a
celerity, that surprised all the parties con-
cerned, and most myself, I called at the
lodgings of Mr. Devereux, delivered the let-
ter to his servant, and left town. I could
not bear to see either Mr. Devereux, or
Lady Geraldine. I had the pleasure to
hear, that the obtaining this appointment
was followed by Lady Kildangan’s consent
to their marriage. Soon after my return to
Glenthorn Castle, I received a letter of
warm thanks from Devereux, and a polite
postscript from Lady Geraldine, declaring
that, though she felt much pleasure, she
could feel no surprise in seeing her opinion
of Lord Glenthorn justified ; persuaded, as
she and Mr. Devereux had always been,
that only motive and opportunity were
wanting, to make his lordship’s superior
qualities known to the world, and, what is
still more difficult, to himself. They left
Ireland immediately afterwards, in conse-
quence of their appointment in India.

I was raised in my own estimation—I
revelled a short time in my self-complacent
reflections ; but when nothing more re-
mained to be done, or to be said—when the
hurry of action, the novelty of generosity.

the glow of enthusiasm, and the freshness
of gratitude, were over, I felt that, though
large motives could now invigorate my
mind, I was still a prey to habitual indo-
lence, and that Î should relapse into my
former state of apathy and disease.

CHAPTER XII.

I REMEMBER to have heard, in some epi*
logue to a tragedy, that the tide of pity and
of love, whilst it overwhelms, fertilizes the
soul. That it may deposit the seeds of fu-
ture fertilization, I believe ; but some time
must elapse before they germinate : on the
first retiring of the tide the prospect is bar-
ren and desolate. I was absolutely inert,
and almost imbecile for a considerable time,
after the extraordinary stimulus, by which I
had been actuated, was withdrawn. I was
in this state of apathy, when the rebellion
broke out in Ireland ; nor was I roused in
the least by the first news of the disturb-
ances; the intelligence, however, so much
alarmed my English servants, that, with
one accord, they left me; nothing could
persuade them to remain longer in Ireland.
The parting with my English gentleman af-
fected my lethargic selfishness a little. His

loss would have been grievous to such a
helpless being as I was, had not his place
been immediately supplied by that half-
witted Irishman, Joe Kelly, who had in-
gratiated himself with me by a mixture of
drollery and simplicity, and by suffering
himself to be continually my laughing-stock,
for, in imitation of Lady Geraldine, I
thought it necessary to have a butt. I re-
member he first caught my notice by a
strange answer to a very simple question.
I asked, c< What noise is that I hear?”—
ts My lard,” said he, <c it is only the sing-
ing in my ears; I have had it these six
months.” Another time, when I reproached
him for having told me a lie, he answered,
<c Why, now indeed, and plase your honour,
my lard, I tell as few lies as possibly I can.”
This fellow, the son of a bricklayer, had
originally been intended for a priest, and
he went, as he told me, to the College of
Maynooth, to study his humanities j but,
unluckily, the charms of some Irish Heloise
came between him and the altar. He lived
in a cabin on love, till he was weary of his
smoke-dried Heloise, and then thought it

convanient to turn sarving man, as he could
play on the flute, and brush a coat remark-
ably well, which he lamed at Maynooth, by
brushing the coats of the superiors. Though
he was willing to be laughed at, Joe Kelly
could in his turn laugh ; and he now ridi-
culed, without mercy, the pusillanimity of
the English renegadoes, as he called the ser-
vants who had just left my service. He
assured me that, to his knowledge, there
was no manner of danger, except a man pre-
farred being afraid of his oivn shadow, which
some did, rather than have nothing to talk
of or enter into resolutions about, with some
of the spirited men in the chair.

Unwilling to be disturbed, I readily be-
lieved all that lulled me in my security. I
would not be at the trouble of reading the
public papers, and when they were read to
me, I did not credit any paragraph that mi-
litated against my own opinion. Nothing
could awaken me. I remember, one day,
lying yawning on my sofa, repeating to Mr.
M*Leod, who endeavoured to open my eyes
to the situation of the country,

" Pshaw, my dear sir ; there is no danger,

be assured—none at all—none at all. For
mercy’s sake ! talk to me of something more
diverting, if you would keep me awake ;
time enough to think of these things, when
they come nearer to us.”

Evils that were not immediately near me
had no power to affect my imagination. My
tenantry had not yet been contaminated by
the epidemic infection, which broke out soon
after with such violence, as to threaten the
total destruction of all civil order. I had
lived in England—I was unacquainted with
the causes and the progress of the disease,
and I had no notion of my danger ; all I
knew was, that some houses had been rob-
bed of arms, and that there was a set of
desperate wretches called defenders ; but I
was annoyed only by the rout that was now
made about them. Having been used to
the regular course of justice which pre-
vailed in England, I was more shocked at
the summary proceedings of my neighbours,
than alarmed at the symptoms of insurrec-
tion. Whilst my mind was in this mood, I
w as provoked by the conduct of some of the
violent party, which wounded my personal

pride, and infringed upon my imagined con-
sequence. My foster-brother’s forge was
searched for pikes, his house ransacked, his
bed and bellows, as possible hiding-places*
were cut open ; by accident, or from private
malice, he received a shot in his arm, and,
though not the slightest cause of suspicion
could be found against him, the party left
him with a broken arm, and the consolation
of not being sent to jail as a defender. With-
out making any allowance for the peculiar
circumstances of the country, my indigna-
tion was excited in the extreme, by the in-
jury done to my foster-brother ; his suffer-
ings, the tears of his mother, the taunts of
Mr. (now Captain) Bardeastle, and the op-
position made by his party, called forth all
the faculties of my mind and body. The
poor fellow, who was the subject of this
contest, showed the best disposition ima-
ginable; he was excessively grateful tome
for interesting myself to get him justice ;
but as soon as he found that parties ran
high against me, he earnestly dissuaded me
from persisting.

“ Let it drop, andplaseyom honour; my

lord, let it drop, and don’t be making of
yourself inimies for the likes of me. Sure,
what signifies my arm ? and, before the next
assizes, sha’n’t I be as well as ever, arm and
all ?” continued he, trying to appear to move
the arm without pain. “ And there’s the
new bellows your honour has give me ; it
does my heart good to look at ’em, and it
won’t be long before I will be blowing them
again as stout as ever; and so God bless
your honour, my lord, and think no more
about it—let it drop entirely, and don’t be
bringing yourself into trouble.”

“ Ay, don’t be bringing yourself into
trouble, dear,” added Ellinor, who seemed
half-distracted between her feelings for her
son, and her fears for me ; “ it’s a shame to
think of the way they’ve treated Christy—
but there’s no help now, and it’s best not to
be making bad worse ; and so, as Christy
says, let the thing drop, jewel, and don’t be
bringing yourself into trouble ; you don’t
know the natur of them people, dear—you
are too innocent for them entirely, and my-
self does not know the mischief they might
do ye es

“ True for ye,” pursued Christy; “I

23S

ENNUÏ.

wouldn't for the best cow ever I see, that
your honour ever larn’t a sentence about me
or my arm ; and it is not for such as we to
be minding every little accident—so God
lend you long life, and don’t be plaguing
yourself to death; let it drop, and I’ll sleep
well the night, which I did not do the week,
for thinking of all the trouble you got, and
would get, God presarve ye.”

This generous fellow’s eloquence produced
an effect directly contrary to what was in-
tended ; both my feelings and my pride were
now more warmly interested in his cause. I
insisted upon his swearing examinations be-
fore Mr. MfLeod, who wras a justice of the
peace. Mr. MfLeod behaved with the ut-
most steadiness and impartiality ; and in this
trying moment, when it was infamy to
seem my friend,” he defended my conduct
calmly, but resolutely, in private and in
public, and gave his unequivocal testimony,
in few but decided words, in favour of my
injured tenant. I should have respected
Mr. McLeod more, if I had not attributed
this conduct to his desire of being returned
for one of my boroughs at the approaching
election. Me endeavoured, with persever-

ing goodness, to convince me of the reality
of the danger in the country. My eyes
were with much difficulty forced open so
far as to perceive, that it was necessary to
take an active part in public affairs to vin-
dicate my loyalty, and to do away the pre-
judices that were entertained against me;
nor did my incredulity, as to the magnitude
of the peril, prevent me from making exer-
tions essential to the defence of my own
character, if not to that of the nation. How
few act from purely patriotic and rational
motives ! At all events I acted, and acted
with energy ; and certainly at this period
of my life I felt no ennui. Party-spirit is
an effectual cure for ennui ; and, perhaps,
it is for this reason, that so many are ad-
dicted to its intemperance. All my pas-
sions were roused, and my mind and body
kept in continual activity. I was either
galloping, or haranguing, or fearing, or
hoping, or fighting; and so long as it was
said, that I could not sleep in my bed,
I slept remarkably well, and never had so
good an appetite, as when I was in hourly
danger of having nothing to eat. The re-
bels ivere up, and the rebels were down—and

Lord Glenthorn’s spirited conduct in the
chair, and indefatigable exertions in the
field, were the theme of daily eulogium
amongst my convivial companions and im-
mediate dependants. But, unfortunately,
my sudden activity gained me no credit
amongst the violent party of my neigh-
bours, who persisted in their suspicions;
and my reputation was now still more in-
jured, by the alternate charge of being a
trimmer or a traitor. Nay, I was further
exposed to another danger, of which, from
my ignorance of the country, I could not
possibly be aware. The disaffected them-
selves, as I afterwards found, really believed,
that, as I had not begun by persecuting the
poor, I must be a favourer of the rebels ;
and all that I did to bring the guilty to jus-
tice, they thought was only to give a colour
to the thing, till the proper moment should
come for my declaring myself. Of this ab-
surd and perverse mode of judging I had
not the slightest conception ; and I only
laughed when it was hinted to me. My
treating the matter so lightly confirmed
suspicion on both sides. At this time all
objects were so magnified and distorted by

the mist of prejudice, that no inexperienced
eye could judge of their real proportions.
—Neither party could believe the simple
truth, that my tardiness to act arose from
the habitual inertia of my mind and body.

Whilst prepossessions were thus strong,
the time, the important time, in Ireland the
most important season of the year, the as-
sizes, arrived. My foster-brother’s cause,
or, as it was now generally called, Lord
Glenthorns cause, came on to be tried. I
spared no expense, I spared no exertions :
I feed the ablest counsel -, and not content
with leaving them to be instructed by my
attorney, I explained the affair to them my-
self with indefatigable zeal. One of the
lawyers, whom I had seen, or by whom J
had been seen, in my former inert state of
existence, at some watering-place in Eng-
land, could not refrain from expressing his
astonishment at my change of character:
he could scarcely believe that I was the
same Lord Glen thorn, of whose indolence
and ennui he had formerly heard and seen
*so much.

Alas ! all my activity, all my energy, on

the present occasion, proved ineffectual.—
After a dreadful quantity of false swearing,
the jury professed themselves satisfied ; and,
without retiring from the box, acquitted the
persons who had assaulted my foster-bro-
ther. The mortification of this legal defeat
was not all that I had to endure ; the vic-
torious party mobbed me, as I passed some
time afterwards through a neighbouring
town, where Captain Hardcastle and his
friends had been carousing. I was hooted,
and pelted, and narrowly escaped with my
life. I who, but a few months ago, had
imagined myself possessed of nearly despotic
power: but opinions had changed; and,
on opinion, almost all power is founded.
No individual, unless he possess uncommon
eloquence, joined to personal intrepidity,
can withstand the combination of numbers,
and the force of prejudice.

Such was the result of my first public ex-
ertions ! Yet I was now happier and better
satisfied with myself than I had ever been
before. I was not only conscious of having
acted in a manly and generous manner ; but
the alarms of the rebels, and of the French,

CHAPTER XIIr.

“ And for the book of knowledge fail
“ Presented with an universal blank
" Of Nature’s works to me expunged and rased ”

Unfortunately for me, tTie rebellion in Ire-
land was soon quelled ; the nightly scouring
of our county ceased ; the poor people re-
turned to their duty and their homes -, the
occupation of upstart and ignorant associ-
ators ceased, and their consequence sunk
at once. Things and persons settled to their
natural level. The influence of men of pro-
perty, and birth, and education, and cha-
racter, once more prevailed. The spirit of
party ceased to operate : my neighbours
wakened, as if from a dream, and wondered
at the strange injustice with which I had
been treated. Those who had lately been
my combined enemies were disunited, and
each was eager to assure me, that he had
alzvays been privately my friend, but that he
was compelled to conceal his sentiments :

each exculpated himself, and threw the
blame on others : all apologised to me, and
professed to be my most devoted humble
servants. My popularity, my power, and
my prosperity, were now at their zenith,
unfortunately for me : because my adversity
had not lasted long enough to form and
season my character. I had been driven to
exertion by a mixture of pride and gene-
rosity : my understanding being unculti-
vated, I had acted from the virtuous im-
pulse of the moment, but never from ra-
tional motive, which alone can be perma-
nent in its operation. When the spur of
the occasion pressed upon me no longer, I
relapsed into my former inactivity. When
the great interests and strong passions, by
which I had been impelled to exertion, sub-
sided, ail other feelings, and all less objects,
seemed stale, flat, and unprofitable. For
the tranquillity, which I was now left to
enjoy, I had no taste ; it appeared to me a
dead calm, most spiritless and melancholy.

I remember hearing, some years after-
wards, a Frenchman, who had been in im-
minent danger of being guillotined by Ro-
bespierre, and who, at last, was one of

those who arrested the tyrant, declare, that
when the bustle and horrour of the revolu-
tion were over, he could hardly keep him-
self awake ; and that he thought it very in-
sipid to live in quiet with his wife and fa-
mily. He further summed up the cata-
logue of Robespierre’s crimes, by exclaim-
ing, <c d’ailleurs c’étoit un grand philan-
trope I” I am not conscious of any disposi-
tion to cruelty, and I heard this man’s
speech with disgust 5 vet, upon a candid
self-examination, I must confess, that I
have felt, though from different causes,
some degree of what he described. Per-
haps ennui may have had a share in creating
revolutions. A French author pronounces
ennui to be “ a moral indigestion, caused
by a monotony of situations !”

I had no wife or family to make domestic
life agreeable ; nor was I inclined to a se-
cond marriage, my first had proved so un-
fortunate, and the recollection of my dis-
appointment with Lady Geraldine was so
recent. Even the love of power no longer
acted upon me: my power was now un-
disputed. My jealousy and suspicions of
my agent, Mr. MfLeod, were about this

time completely conquered, by his beha-
viour at a general election. I perceived,
that he had no underhand design upon my
boroughs ; and that he never attempted or
wished to interfere in my affairs, except at
my particular desire. My confidence in
him became absolute and unbounded; but
this was really a misfortune to me, for it
became the cause of my having still less to
do. I gave up all business, and from all
manner of trouble I was now free : yet I
became more and more unhappy, and my
nervous complaints returned. I was not
aware, that I was taking the very means to
increase my own disease. The philosophical
Dr. Cullen observes, that

cc Whatever aversion to application of any
kind may appear in hypochondriacs, there
is nothing more pernicious to them than
absolute idleness, or a vacancy from all
earnest pursuit. It is owing to wealth ad-
mitting of indolence, and leading to the
pursuit of transitory and unsatisfying amuse-
ments, or exhausting pleasures only, that
the present times exhibit to us so many in-
stances of hypochondriacism.”

I fancied that change of air and change

of place would do me good ; and, as it was
fine summer weather, I projected various
parties of pleasure. The Giant’s Cause-
way, and the Lake of Killarnev, were the
only things I had ever heard mentioned as
worth seeing in Ireland. I suffered myself
to be carried into the county of Antrim,
and I saw the Giant’s Causeway. From the
description given by Dr. Hamilton of some
of these wonders of nature, the reader may
judge how much I ought to have been asto-
nished and delighted.

In the bold promontory of Bengore, you
behold, as you look up from the sea, a gi-
gantic colonnade of basaltes, supporting a
black mass of irregular rock, over which
rises another range of pillars, “ forming al-
together a perpendicular height of one hun-
dred and seventy feet, from the base of
which the promontory, covered over with
rock and grass, slopes down to the sea, for
the space of two hundred feet more : mak-
ing, in all, a mass of near four hundred feet
in height, which, in the beauty and variety
of its colouring, in elegance and novelty of
arrangement, and in the extraordinary mag-
nificence of its objects, cannot be rivalled.”

Yet I was seized with a fit of yawning,
as I sat in my pleasure-boat, to admire this
sublime spectacle. I looked at my watch,
observed that we should be late for dinner,
and grew impatient to be rowed back to
the place where we were to dine: not that
I was hungry, but I wanted to be again set
in motion. Neither science nor taste ex-
panded my view ; and I saw nothing worthy
of my admiration, or capable of giving me
pleasure. The watching a straw floating
down the tide was the only amusement I
recollect to have enjoyed upon this excur-
sion.

I was assured, however, by Lady Ormsby,
that I could not help being enchanted with
the Jake of Killarney. The party was ar-
ranged by this lady, who, having the pre-
ceding summer seen me captivated by Lady
Geraldine, and pitying my disappointment
had formed the obliging design of restoring
my spirits, and marrying me to one of her
near relations. She calculated, that, as I
had been charmed by Lady Geraldine’s
vivacity, I must be enchanted with the fine
spirits of Lady Jocunda Lawler. So far
were the thoughts of marriage from my »

imagination, that I only was sorry to find
a young lady smuggled into our party, be-
cause I was afraid she would be trouble-
some : but I resolved to be quite passive
upon all occasions, where attentions to the
fair sex are sometimes expected. My arm,
or my hand, or my assistance, in any man-
ner, I was determined not to offer : the
lounging indifference, which some fashion-
able young men affect towards ladies, I
really felt ; and, besides, nobody minds un-
married women ! This fashion was most
convenient to my indolence. In my state
of torpor I was not, however, long left in
peace. Lady Jocunda was a high-bred
romp, who made it a rule to say and do
whatever she pleased. In a hundred indi-
rect ways I was called upon to admire her
charming spirits; but the rattling voice,
loud laughter, flippant wit, and hoyden
gaiety of Lady Jocunda, disgusted me be-
yond expression. A thousand times on the
journey I wished myself quietly asleep in
my own castle. Arrived at Killarney, such
blowing of horns, such boating, such see-
ing of prospects, such prosing of guides, all
telling us what to admire. Then such ex-

clamations, and such clambering. I was
walked and talked till I was half dead. I
wished the rocks, and the hanging woods,
and the glens, and the water-falls, and the
arbutus, and the myrtles, and the upper
and lower lakes, and the islands, and Mu-
cruss, and Mucruss Abbey, and the purple
mountain, and the eagle's nest, and the
grand Turk, and the lights, and the shades,
and the echoes, and, above all, the Lady
Jocunda, fairly at the devil.

A nobleman in the neighbourhood had
the politeness to invite us to see a stag hunt
upon the water. The account of this di-
version, which I had met with in my Guide
to the Lakes * **, promised well. I consented

* " The stag is roused from the woods that skirt
4‘ Glenaa mountain, in which there are many of these
“ animals that run wild ; the bottoms and sides of the
“ mountains are covered with woods, and the declivi-
" ties are so long and steep, that no horse could either
t( make his way to the bottom, or climb these imprac-

** ticable hills. It is impossible to follow the hunt,

** either by land or on horseback. The spectator en-
** joys the diversion on the lake, where the cry of\
“ hounds, the harmony of the horn, resounding from
the hills on every side, the universal shouts of joy

to stay another day : that day I really was
revived by this spectacle, for it was new.

u along the valleys and mountains, which are often
“ lined with foot people, who come in vast numbers to
44 partake and assist at the diversion, re-echo from hill
“ to hill, and give the highest glee and satisfaction,

" that the imagination can conceive possible to arise
44 from the chase, and perhaps can nowhere be enjoyed
44 with that spirit and sublime elevation of soul, that a
" thoroughbred sportsman feels at a stag-hunt on the
44 lake of Killarney. There is, however, one imminent
“ danger, which awaits him, that in his raptures and
“ ecstasies he may forget himself, and jump out of the
*' boat. When hotly pursued, and weary with the con-
" stant difficulty of making his way with his ramified
*' antlers through the woods, the stag, terrified by the
** cry of his open-mouthed pursuers, almost at his heels,
" now looks towards the lake as his last resource—then
** pauses and looks upwards ; but the hills are insur-
" mountable, and the woods refuse to shelter him—
*' the hounds roar with redoubled fury at the sight of
44 their victim—he plunges into the lake. lie escapes
" but for a few minutes from one merciless enemy to
** fall into the hands of another—the shouting boatmen
44 surround their victim, throw cords round his majestic
antlers—he is haltered and dragged to shore ; while
44 the big tears roll down his face, and his heaving sides
44 and panting flanks speak his agonies, the keen search-
44 ing knife drinks his blood, and savages exult at his
44 expiring groau.”

The sublime and the beautiful had no
charms for me : novelty was the only power,
that could waken me from my lethargy ;
perhaps there was in this spectacle some-
thing more than novelty. The Romans
had recourse to shows of wild beasts and
gladiators to relieve their ennui. At all
events, I was kept awake this whole morn-
ing, though I cannot say, that I felt in
such ecstasiesy as to be in any imminent dan-
ger of jumping out of the boat.

Of our journey back from Killarney I re-
member nothing, but my being discomfited,
by Lady Jocunda’s practical jests and over-
powering gaiety. When she addressed her-
self to me, my answers were as constrained
and as concise as possible ; and, as I was
afterwards told, I seemed, at the close of my
reply to each interrogative of her ladyship’s,
to answer with Oden’s prophetess,

“ Now my weary lips I close ;

“ Leave me, leave me to repose.0

This she never did till we parted ; and at that
moment, I believe, my satisfaction appeared
so visible, that Lady Ormsby gave up all
hopes of me. Arrived at my own castle, I
threw myself on my bed quite exhausted. I

took three hours’ additional sleep every day,
for a week, to recruit my strength, and rest
my nerves, after all that I had been made, to
suffer by this young lady’s prodigious animal
spirits.

CHAPTER XIV.

I COULD now boast that I had travelled all
over Ireland, from north to south, but, in
fact, I had seen nothing of the country, or of
its inhabitants. In these commodious parties
of pleasure, every thing had been provided to
prevent the obstacles that roused my faculties.
Accustomed by this time to the Hibernian
tone, I fancied that I knew all that could be
known of the Irish character ; familiarized
with the comic expressions of the lower class
of people, they amused me no longer. On
this journey, however, I recollect making one
observation, and once laughing at what I
thought a practical bull. We saw a number
of labourers at work in a bog, on a very hot
day, with a fire lighted close to them. When
I afterwards mentioned, before Mr. McLeod,
this circumstance which I had thought ab-
surd, he informed me, that the Irish la-
bourers often light fires, that the smoke
may drive away or destroy those myriads of

tiny insects, called midges, by which they
are often tormented so much, that without
this remedy, they would, in hot and damp
weather, be obliged to abandon their work.
Had I been sufficiently active during myjour-
ney to pen ajournai, I should certainly, with-
out further inquiry, have noted down, that
the Irish labourers always light fires in the
hottest weather to cool themselves, and thus
I should have added one more to the number
of cursory travellers, who expose their own
ignorance, whilst they attempt to ridicule lo-
cal customs,of which they have not inquired
the cause or discovered the utility.

A foreigner, who has lately written letters
on England, has. given a laughable instance
of this promptitude of misapprehension.

He says, he had heard much of the venal-
ity of British parliament, but he had no idea
of the degree to which it extended, till he
actually was an eye-witness of the scene. The
moment the minister entered the house, all
the members ran about exclaiming, Places !
places ! which means. Give us places—give
us places.

My heavy indolence fortunately preserved
me from exposing myself, like these volatile

tourists. I was at least secure from the dan-
ger of making mistakes in telling what I
never saw.

As to the mode of living of the Irish, their
domestic comforts, or grievances ; their ha-
bits and opinions ; their increasing or de-
creasing ambition to better their condition;
the proportion between the population and
the quantity of land cultivated, or capable of
cultivation ; the difference between the pro-
fits of the husbandman and the artificer; the
relation between the nominal wages of labour,
and the actual command over the necessaries
of life : these were questions wholly foreign
to my thoughts, and, at this period of my
life, absolutely beyond the range of my un-
derstanding. I had travelled through my own
country, without making even a single re-
mark upon the various degrees of industry
and civilization visible in different parts of
the kingdom. In fact, it never occurred to
me, that it became a British nobleman to have
some notion of the general state of that em-
pire, in the legislation of which he has a
share ; nor had I the slightest suspicion, that
political economy was a study requisite or
suitable to my rank in life or situation in so-

ciety. Satisfied with having seen all that is
worth seeing in Ireland, the Giant’s Cause-
way and the Lake of Killarney, I was now
impatient to return to England. During the
rebellion, I could not, with honour, desert my
post ; but now that tranquillity was appa-
rently restored, I determined to quit a coun-
try, of which my partial knowledge had in
every respect been unfortunate. This reso-
lution of mine to leave Ireland threw Ellinor
into despair, and she used all her eloquence
to dissuade me from the journey. I was quite
surprised by the agony of grief, into which
she was thrown by the dread of my departure.
I felt astonished, that one human being could
be so much attached to another, and I really
envied her sensibility. My new man, Joe
Kelly, also displayed much reluctance at the
thoughts of leaving his native country ; and
this sentiment inclined Eilinorto think more
favourably of him, though she could not quite
forgive him for being aKelly of Ballymuddy.

“ Troth,” said she to him one day, in my
presence, tc none of them Kelly’s of Bally-
muddy but what are a bad clan ! Joey, is
not there your own brodei'ys uncle lying in
the jail of ******** at this present time

ibr the murder of a woman.”—“ Well,” re-
plied Joe, “ and if he was so unfortunate to
be put up, which was not asp done neither,
is not it better and more creditabler to lie
in jail for a murder than a robbery, I ask
you ?”—This new scale of crimes surprised
me, but Joe spoke what was the sense of
many of his countrymen at that period.

By various petty attentions, this man con-
trived to persuade me of the sincerity of his
attachment: chiefly by the art of appearing
to be managed by me in all things, he insen-
sibly obtained power over my pride; and, by
saving me daily trouble, secured considerable
influence over my indolence. More than any
one whom I had ever seen, he had the knack
of seeming half-witted : too simple to over-
reach, and yet sufficiently acute and droll to
divert his master. I liked to have him about
me, as uncultivated kings like to have their
fools. One of our ancient monarchs is said
to have given three parishes to his joculator;
I gave only three farms to mine. I had a sort
of mean pride in making my favourite an ob-
ject of envy: besides, I fell into the common
mistake of the inexperienced great, who
fancy that attachment can be purchased, and

that gratitude can be secured, by favours dis-
proportioned to deserts. Joe Kelly, by sun-
dry manœuvres too minute for description,
contrived to make me delay, from day to day,
the preparations for my journey to England.
From week to week it was put off, till the
autumn was far advanced. At length Kelly
had nothing left to suggest, but that it would
be best to wait for answers from my English
steward, to the letters that had been written
to inquire whether every thing was ready for
my reception. During this interval, I avoid-
ed every human creature (except Joe Kelly),
and was in great danger of becoming a mis-
anthrope from mere indolence. I did not
hate my fellow-creatures, but I dreaded the
trouble of talking to them. My only re-
creation, at this period, was sauntering out
in the evening beside the sea shore. It was
my regular practice to sit down upon a cer-
tain large stone, at the foot of a rock, to
watch the ebbing of the tide. There was
something in the contemplation of the sea
and of the tides, which was fascinating to

my mind. I could sit and look at the ocean
%/

whole hours together ; for, without any ex-
ertion of my own, I beheld a grand opera-

lion of nature, accompanied with a sort of
vast monotony of motion and sound, which
lulled me into reverie.

Late one evening, as I was seated on my
accustomed stone, my attention was slightly
diverted from the sea by the sight of a man
descending the crag above me, in rather a
perilous manner. With one end of a rope
coiled round his body, and the other fastened
to a stake driven into the summit of the rock,
lie let himself half way down the terrible
height. One foot now rested on a project-
ing point, one hand held the rope, and hang-
ing thus midway in the air, he seemed busy
searching in the crevices of the rock for the
eggs of water fowl. This dangerous trade I
had seen frequently plied on this coast, so
that I should scarcely have regarded the man,
if he had not turned, from time to time, as if
to watch me. When he saw that he had
fixed my eye, he threw down, as I thought,
a white stone, which fell nearly at my feet.
I stooped to examine it ; the man waited till
he saw it in my hands, then coiled himself
swiftly up his rope to the summit of the
rock, and disappeared. I found a paper
tied round the stone, and on this paper, in a

hand-writing that seemed to be feigned, were
written these words :—

“ Your life and caracter, one or t'other—
say both, is in danger. Don’t be walking
here any more late in the evening, near them
caves, nor don’t go near the old abbey any
time—And don’t be trusting to Joe Kelly any
way—Lave the kingdom entirely > the wind
sarves.

“ So prays your true well-wisher.

<c P. S. Lave the castle the morrow, and
say nothing of this to Joe Kelly, or you’ll
repent when it’s all over wid you.”

I was startled a little by this letter at first,
but in half an hour I relapsed into my apa-
thy. Many gentlemen in the country had
received anonymous letters: I had been tired
of hearing of them during the rebellion.
This, I thought, might be only a quiz, or a
trick to hurry me out of the kingdom, con-
trived by some of those who desired my ab-
sence. In short, the labour of thinking about
the matter fatigued me. I burned the letter
as soon as I got home, and resolved not to
puzzle or plague myself about it any more.
My steward's answer came the next morn-
ing from England : Kelly made no difficulty,

when I ordered him to be ready to set out
in three days. This confirmed me in my
opinion, that the letter was malicious, or a
jest. Mr. M‘Leod came to take leave of
me. I mentioned the circumstance to him
slightly, and in general terms : he looked
very serious, and said—

All these things are little in themselves,
but are to be heeded, as marking the unset-
tled minds of the people—straws, that show
which way the wind blows. I apprehend we
shall have a rough winter again, though we
have had so still a summer. The people
about us are too hush and too prudent—it is
not their natures—there’s something contriv-
ing among them : they don’t break one an-
other’s heads at fairs as they used to do; they
keep from whiskey ; there must be some
strong motive working this change upon them
—good or bad, ’tis hard to say which. My
lord, if we consider the condition of these
poor people, and if we consider the causes—”
“ Oh ! for Heaven’s sake, do not let us
consider any more about it now ; I am more
than half asleep already,” said I, yawning,
“ and our considering about it can do no
good, to me at least ; for you know I am

going out of the kingdom ; and when I am
gone, M'Leod, you, in whom I have implicit
confidence, must manage as you always used
to do, you know, and as well as you can.”

“ True,” said M‘Leod calmly,*4* that is
what I shall do, indubitably ; for that is my
duty ; and, since your lordship has implicit
confidence in me, my pleasure. I wish
your lordship a good night and a good
journey.”

cf I shall not set out in the morning—not
till the day after to-morrow, I believe,” said I,
“ for I feel consumedly tired to night: they
have plagued me about so many things to
day; so much business always before one
can get away from a place ; and then Joe
Kelly has no head.”

“ Have a care he has not too much head,
iny lord, as your anonymous correspondent
hints—he may be right there—I told you
from the first I would not go security for
Joe Kelly’s honesty ; and where there is not
strict honesty, I conceive there ought not
to be implicit confidence.”

“ O, hang it ! as to honesty, they are none
of them honest ; I know that : but would
you have me plague myself till I find a

strictly honest servant ? Joe's as honest as
his neighbours, I dare say: the fellow diverts
me, and is attached to me, and that’s all I
can expect. I must submit to be cheated, as
all men of large fortunes are, more or less.”
Mr. M‘Leod listened with stubborn pa-
tience, and replied, That if I thought it ne-
cessary to submit to be cheated, he could
make no objection, except where it might
come under his cognizance, and then he
must take the liberty to remonstrate, or to
give up his agency to some of the many,
who could play better than he could the part
of the dog in thé fable, pretending to guard
his master’s meat.

The cold ungracious integrity of this man,
even in my own cause, at once excited my’
spleen and commanded my respect. After
shaking my leg as I sat for two minutes in
silence, I called after McLeod, who moved
towards the door,

cc Why, what can I do, Mr. M‘Leod r
What would you have me do ? Now, don’t
give me one of your dry answers, but let me
have your notions as a friend : you know,
McLeod, ITannot help having the most
perfect confidence in you.”

He bowed, but rather stiffly.

‘Ham proud to hear you cannot help that,
my lord,” said he. “ As to a friend, I never
considered myself upon that footing till now:
but as you at present honour me so far as to
ask my counsel, I am free to give it. Part
with Joe Kelly to night 3 and whether you go
or stay, you are safer without him. Joe’s a
rogue: he can do no good, and may do
harm.”

<c Then,” said I, cc you are really fright-
ened by this anonymous letter?”

“ Cannot a man take prudent precautions
without he is frightened?” said M‘Leod.

cc But have you any particular reason to
believe—in short to—to think, there can be
any real danger for my life?”

“ No particular reason, my lord 3 but the
general reasons I have mentioned, the sym-
ptoms among the common people lead me to
apprehend there may be fresh risings of the
people soon, and you, as a man of fortune
and rank, must be in danger. Captain I lard-
castle says, that he has had informations of
seditious meetings 3 but he being a prejudiced
man, I don’t trust altogether to what he

“ Trust altogether to what he says!” ex-
claimed I: “ no, surely; for my part, I
do not trust a word he says: and his giving
it as his opinion that the people are ill-in-
clined, would decide me to believe the exact
contrary.”

c< It would hardly be safe to judge that way
either,” said McLeod; cc for that method of
judging by contraries might make another’s
folly the master of one’s own sense.”

“ I don’t comprehend you now. Safe way
of judging or not, Captain Hardcastle’s opi-
nion shall never lead mine. When I asked
for your advice, Mr. M£Leod, it was because
I have a respect for your understanding; but
I cannot defer to Captain Hardcastle’s. I
am now decided in my own opinion, that the
people in this neighbourhood are perfectly
well disposed : and as to this anonymous let^
ter, it is a mere trick, depend upon it, my
good sir. I am surprised that a man of your
capacity should be the dupe of such a thing.
[ should not be surprised if Hardcastle him-
self, or some of his people, wrote it*”

“ I should,” said MT.eod, coolly»

“ You should!” cried I, warmly. (£ Why
so ? And why do you pronounce so decidedly.

my good friend ? Have not I the same means
of judging as you have? unless, indeed, you
have some private reason with which I am
unacquainted. Perhaps,” cried I, starting
half up from the sofa on which I lay, charmed
with a bright idea, which had just struck me,
“ perhaps, McLeod, you wrote the letter
yourself for a jest. Did you ?”

“That’s a question,my lord,”saidM‘Leod,
growing suddenly red, and snatching up his
hat with a quicker motion than I ever saw
from him before, “ That’s a question, my
lord, which I must take leave not to answer :
a question, give me leave to add, my Lord
Glenthorn,” continued he, speaking in a
broader Scotch accent than I had ever heard
from him before, “ which I should knock my
equal doon for putting to me. A McLeod,
my lord, in jest or in earnest, would scorn to
write to any man breathing that letter to
which he would not put his name: and more,
a McLeod w'ould scorn to write or to say that
thing, to which he ought not to put his name.
Your humble servant, my Lord Glenthorn,”
said he, and making a hasty bow, departed.

I called after him, and even followed him
to the head of the stairs, to explain and apo-

iogise; but in vain: I never saw him angry
before.

“ It’s very weel, my lord, it’s very weel ; if
you say you meant nothing offensive, it’s very
weel; but, if you think fit, my lord, we will
sleep upon it before we talk any more. I am
a wee bit warmer than I could wish, and your
lordship has the advantage of me, in being
cool. A McLeod is apt to grow warm, when
he’s touched on the point of honour; and
there’s no wisdom in talking when a man’s
not his own master.”

“ My good friend,” said I, seizing his
hand as he was buttoning up his coat, “ I like
you the better for this warmth : but I won’t
let you sleep upon your wrath : you must
shake hands with me before that hall-door is
opened to you.”

ec Then so I do, for there’s no standing
against this frankness: and to be as frank
with you, my lord, I was wrong myself to be
so testy—I ask pardon too. A MfLeod
never thought it a disgrace to crave a pardon
when he was wrong.”

We shook hands, and parted better friends
than ever. I spoke the exact truth when I
said, that I liked him the better for his

warmth: his anger wakened me, and gave
me something to think of, and some emo^
tion for a few minutes. Joe Kelly presently
afterwards came, with the simplest face ima-
ginable, to inquire what I had determined
about thejourney.

<c To put it off till the day after to mor-
row/* said I. “ Light me to bed.”

He obeyed, but observed, that “ it was
not his fault now if there was puttings-off ;
for his share every thing was ready, and he
was willing and ready to follow me, at a mo-
ment’s warning, to the world’s end, as he had
a good right to do, let alone inclination; for,
parting me, he could never be right in him-
self; and though loth to part his country, he
had rather part that nor* me.”

Then without dwelling upon these expres-
sions of attachment, he changed to a merry
mood, and, by his drolleries, diverted me
all the time I was going to bed, and at last
fairly talked me asleep.

* Than.

CHAPTER XV.

WlIEN the first gray light of morning began
to make objects indistinctly visible, I thought
I saw the door of my apartment open very
softly. I was broad awake, and kept my
eyes fixed upon it—it opened by very slow
degrees ; my head was so full of visions, that
I expected a ghost to enter—but it was only
Ellinor.

“ Ellinor,” cried I, “ is it you, at this time
in the morning ?”

u Hush ! hush I ” said she, shutting the
door with great precaution, and then coming
on tiptoe close to my bed-side; <c for the
love of God speak softly, and make no stir
to awake them that’s asleep near and too near
you. It’s unknown to all that I come up ; for,
may be, when them people are awake and
about I might not get the opportunity to
speak, or they might guess I knew something
by my looks.”

Her looks were full of terrour—I was all
amazement and expectation. Before she
would say a word more, she searched the

closets carefully, and looked behind the
tapestry, as if she apprehended that she
might be overheard ; satisfied that we were
alone, she went on speaking, but still in a
voice that, with my utmost strained atten-
tion, I could but just hear.

“ As you hope to live and breathe,’* said
she, never go again, after nightfall, any
time walking in that lone place by the sea-
shore. It’s a mercy you escaped as you did,
but if you go again you’ll never come back
alive—for never would they get you to do
what they want, and to be as wicked as
themselves—the wicked villains ! ”

Who ?” said I—“ What wicked vil-
lains? I do not understand you; are you in
your right senses?”

“ That I am, and wish you was as much
in yours; but it’s time yet, by the blessing of
God ! What wicked villains am I talking of?
Of three hundred that have sworn to make
you their captain, or, in case you refuse,
to have your life this night. What villains
am I talking of? Of him, the wickedest
of all, who is now living in the very house
with you, that is now lying in the very next
room to you,”

« Joe Kelly?”

"That same—from the first minute I saw
him in the castle, I should have hated him,
but for his causing you for to put off the
journey to England. I never could abide
him; but that blinded me, or I am sure I
would have found him out long ago.”

“ And what have you found out concern-
ing him ?”

“ That he is (speaking very low) a united
man, and stirring up the nibbles again here ;
and they have their meetings at night in the
great cave, where the smugglers used to hide
formerly, under the big rock, opposite the old
abbey—and there’s a way up into the abbey,
that you used to be so fond of walking to,
dear.”

“ Good Heavens! can this be true!”

“ True it is, and too true, dear.”

“ But how did you find all this out, Elli-
nor?”

« It was none of I found it, nor ever
could any such things have come into my
head—but it pleased God to make the dis-
covery of all by one of the childer—my own
grandson—the boy you gave the gun to, long
and long ago, to shoot them rabbits. He

was after a hare yesterday, and it took him a
chase over that mountain, and down it went
and took shelter in the cave, and in went the
boy after it, and as he was groping about, he
lights on an old great coat, and if he did he
brought it home with him, and was showing
it, as I was boiling the potatoes for their din-
ner yesterday, to his father forenent me, and
turning the pockets inside out, what should
come up but the broken head of a pike ; then
he sarches in the other pocket, and finds a
paper written all over—I could not read it—
thank God, I never could read none of them
wicked things, nor could the boy—by very
great luck he could not, being no scholar, or
it would be all over the country before
this.”

“ Well, well ! but what was in the paper
after all? Did any body read it?”

<( Ay, did they—that is, Christy read it—
none but Christy—but he would not tell us
what was in it—but said it was no matter,
and he’d not be wasting his time reading an
old song—,so we thought no more, and he
sent the boy up to the castle with a bill for
smith’s work, as soon as we had eat the po^
tatoes, and I thought no more about any

thing’s being going wrong, no more than a
child ; and in the evening Christy said he
must go to the funeral of a neighbour, and
should not be home till early in the morning,
may be; and it’s not two hours since he came
home and wakened me, and told me where
he had been, which was not to the funeral at
all, but to the cave where the coat was found ;
and he put the coat and the broken head of
the pike, and the papers all in the pockets,
just as we found it in the cave—and the
paperwas a list of the names of them rubbles
that met there, and a letter telling how they
would make Lord Glenthorn their captain,
or have his life; this was what made Christy
to try and find out more—so he hid himself
in a hole in the side of the cave, and built his-
self up with rubbish, only just leaving a place
for hisself to breathe—and there he staid till
nightfall,and then on till midnight, God help
us! So, sure enough, them villains all come
filling fast into the cave. He had good
courage, God bless him for it—but he al-
ways had—and there he heard and saw all—
and this was how they were talking:—First,
one began by saying, how they must not be
delaying longer to show themselves; they

must make a rising in the country—then nam-
ed the numbers in other parts that would join,
and that they would not be put down so asy
as afore, for they would have good leaders—
then some praised you greatly,and said they
were sure you favoured them in your heart,
by all the ill-will you got in the county the
time of the last ’ruction. But, again, others
said you was milk and water, and did not go
far enough, and never would, and that it was
not in you, and that you was a sleepy man,
and not the true thing at all, and neither beef
nor vael. Again, thim that were for you spoke
and said you would show yourself soon—and
the others made reply, and observed you must
now spake out, or never spake more; you
must either head ’em, or be tramped under
foot along with the rest, so it did not signify
talking, and Joey Kelly should not be frib-
bling any more about it; and it was a wonder,
said they, he was not the night at the meet-
ing. And what was this about your being
going off foi* England—what would they do
when you was gone, with M‘Leod the Scotch-
man, to come in over them again agent, who
was another guess sort of man from you, and
never slept at all, and would scent ’em out.

and have his corps after ’em, and that once
McLeod was master, there would be no
making any head again his head ; so, not to
be tiring you too much with all they said,
backward and forward, one that was a cap-
tain, or something that way, took the word,
and bid ’em all hold their peace, for they did
not know what they was talking on, and said
that Joey Kelly and he had settled it all, and
that the going to England was put off by Joe,
and all a sham, and that when you would be
walking out to morrow at nightfall, in those
lone places by the sea-side or the abbey, he
and Joe was to seize upon you, and when
you would be coming back near the abbey,
to have you down through the trap-door in-
to the cave, and any way they would swear
you to join and head them, and if you would
not, out with you and shove you into the sea,
and no more about it, for it would be give
out you drown’ yourself in a fit of the me-
lancholic lunacy,which none would question,
and it would be proved too you made away
wid yourself, by your hat and gloves lying
on the bank—Lord save us ! What are you
laughing at in that, when it is truth every
word, and Joe Kelly was to find the body.

after a great search. Well, again, say you
would swear and join them, and head them,
and do whatever they pleased, still that
would not save you in the end, for they
would quarrel with you at the first turn,
because you would not be ruled by them as
captain, and then they would shoot or pike
you (God save the mark, dear), and give
the castle to Joe Kelly, and the plunder all
among ’em entirely. So it was all laid out,
and they are all to meet in the cave to-
morrow evening—they will go along, bear-
ing a funeral, seemingly to the abbey-
ground. And now you know the whole
truth, and the Lord preserve you ! and
what will be done ? My poor head has no
more power to think for you no more than
an infant’s, and I’m all in a tremble ever
since I heard it, and afraid to meet any
one lest they should see all in my face. Oh,
what will become of yees now—they will
be the death of you, whatever you do !”

By the time she came to these last words,
Ellinor’s fears had so much overpowered
her, that she cried and sobbed continually,
repeating—“ What will be done now I
What will be done ! They’ll surely be the

death of you, whatever you do.” As to
me, the urgency of the danger wakened
my faculties; I rose instantly, wrote a note
to Mr. ^LLeod, desiring to see him imme-
diately on particular business. Lest my
note should by any accident be intercepted
or opened, I couched it in the most gene-
ral and guarded terms, and added a request,
that he would bring his last settlement of
accounts with him; so that it was natural
to suppose my business with him was of a
pecuniary nature. I gradually quieted
poor Ellinor by my own appearance of
composure ; I assured; her, that we should
take our measures so as to prevent all mis-,
chief—thanked her for the timely warning
she had given me—^-advised her to go home
before she was observed, and charged her
not to speak to any one this day of what
had happened. I desired that as soon as
she should see Mr. M‘Leod coming through
the gate, she would send Christy after him
to the castle, to get his bill paid ; so that I
might then, without exciting suspicion,,
talk to him in private, and we might leara
from his own lips the particulars of what
he saw and heard in the cavern.

Ellinor returned home, promising to obey
me exactly, especially as to my injunction
of secrecy—to make sure of herself she
said “ she would go to bed straight, and
have the rheumatism very bad all day, so
as not to be in a way to talk to none who
would call in.” The note to M‘Leod was
dispatched by one of my grooms, and I
was now left at full leisure to finish my
morning’s nap.

Joe Kelly presented himself at the usual
hour in my room; I turned my head away
from him, and, in a sleepy tone, muttered
that I had passed a bad night, and should
breakfast in my own apartment.

Some time afterwards Mr. McLeod ar-
rived, with an air of sturdy pride, and pro-
duced his accounts, of which I suffered him
to talk, till the servant who waited upon us
had left the room; I then explained the
real cause of my sending for him so sud-
denly. I was rather vexed, that I could
not produce in him, by my wonderful nar-
rative, any visible signs of agitation or
astonishment. He calmly observed—

“ We are lucky to have so many hours
of day-light before us. The first thing we

have to do is to keep the old woman from
talking.

I answered for Ellinor.

“ Then the next thing is for me, who am
a magistrate, to take the examinations of
her son, and see if he will swear to the
same that he says.”

. Christy was summoned into our presence,
and he came with his bill for smith's work
(lone; so that the servants could have no
suspicion of what was going forward. His
examinations were taken and sworn to in a
few minutes ; his evidence was so clear and
direct, tnat there was no possibility of
doubting the truth. The only variation
between his story and his mother’s report
to me was as to the numbers he had seen
in the cavern—her fears had turned thir-
teen into three hundred.

Christy assured us, that there were but
thirteen at this meeting, but that they said
there were three hundred ready to join
them.

ts You were a very bold fellow, Christy,”
said I, “ to hazard yourself in the cave
with these villains ; if you had been found

out in your hiding-place, they would have
certainly murdered you.”

“ True for me,” said Christy; “ buta
man must die some way, please your ho-
nour; and where’s the way I could die
better ? Sure, I could not but remember
how good you was to me that time I wTas
shot, and all you suffered for it ! It would
have been bad indeed if I would stay quiet,
and let ’em murder you after all. No, no,
Christy O’Donoghoe would not do that—
any way. I hope, if there’s to be any
fighting, your honour would not wrong
me so much as not to give me a blun-
derbush, and let me fight a bit along wid
the rest for yees.”

“ We are not come to that yet, my
good fellow,” said Mr. M‘Leod, vrho wrent
on methodically; “ if you are precipitate,
you will spoil all. Go home to your forge,
and work as usual, and leave the rest to us ;
and I promise, that you shall have your
share if there is any fighting.”

Very reluctantly Christy obeyed. Mr.
M‘Leod then deliberately settled our plan
of operations. I had a fishing-lodge at a

little distance, and a pleasure-boat there ï
to this place M‘Leod was to go, as if on a
fishing-party with his nephew, a young
man, who often went there to fish. They
were to carry with them some yeomen in
coloured clothes, as their attendants, and
more were to come as their guests to din-
ner. At the lodge there was a small four-
pounder, which had been frequently used
in times of public rejoicing; a naval vic-
tory, announced in the papers of the day,
afforded a plausible pretence for bringing
it out. We were aware that the rebels
would be upon the watch, and therefore
took every precaution to prevent their sus-
pecting, that we had made any discovery.
Our fishing-party was to let the mock-fu-
neral pass them quietly, to ask some tri-
fling questions, and to give money for pipes
and tobacco. Towards evening the boat,
with the four-pounder on board, was to
come under shore, and at a signal given by
me was to station itself opposite to the
mouth of the cave.

At the same signal a trusty man on the
watch was to give notice to a party hid in
the abbey, to secure the trap-door above.

The signal was to be my presenting a pistol
to the captain of the rebels, who intended
to meet and seize me on my return from
my evening’s walk. Mr. M‘Leod at first
objected to my hazarding a meeting with
this man; but I insisted upon it, and I was
not sorry to give a public proof of my loy-
alty, and my personal courage. As to Joe
Kelly, I also undertook to secure him.

Mr. M‘Leod left me, and went to con-
duct his fishing-party. As soon as he was
gone I sent for Joe Kelly to play on the
flute to me. I guarded my looks and voice
as well* as I could, and he did not see or
suspect any thing—he was too full of his
own schemes. To disguise his own plots
he affected great gaiety, and to divert me,
alternately played on the flute, and told me
good stories all the morning. I would not
let him leave me the whole day. Towards
evening I began to talk of my journey to
England, proposed setting out the next
morning, and sent Kelly to look for some
things, in what was called the strong closet—
a closet with a stout door, and iron-barred
windows, out of which no mortal could
make his escape. Whilst he wTas busy

searching in a drawer* .I shut the door upon
him, locked it, and put the key into my
pocket. As I left the castle, I said in a
jesting tone to some of the servants who met
me—“ I have locked Joe Kelly up in the
strong room ; if he calls to you to let him
out, never mind him ; he will not get out
till I come home from my walk—I owe him
this trick.’* The servants thought it was
some jest, and I passed on with my loaded
pistols in my pocket. I walked for some
time by the sea-shore, without seeing any
one. At last I espied our fishing-boat, just
peering out, and then keeping close to the
shore. I was afraid that the party would
be impatient at not seeing my signal, and
would come out to the mouth of the cave,
and show themselves too soon. If Mr.
McLeod had not been their commander,
this, as I afterwards learned, would have
infallibly happened; but he was so punc-
tual, cool, and peremptory, that he re-
strained the rest of the party, declaring that,
if it were till midnight, he would wait till
the signal agreed upon was given. At last
I saw a man creeping out of the cave—I sat
down upon my wonted stone, and yawned

as naturally as I could ; then began to de*
scribe figures in the sand with my stick, as
I was wont to do, still watching the image
of the man in the water as hé approached.
He was muffled up in a frieze great coat ;
he sauntered past, and went on to a turn in
the road, as if looking for some one. I knew
well for whom he was looking. As no Joe
Kelly came to meet him, he returned in a
few minutes towards me. I had my hand
upon the pistol in my pocket.

“ You are my Lard Glenthorn, I pre-
sume,” said he.

“ I am,”	/

“ Then you .will come with me, if you
plase, my lord,” said he.

“ Make no resistance^ or I will shoot you
instantly,” cried I, presenting my pistol
with one hand, and seizing him by the collar
with the other. I dragged him (for I had
force enough, now my energy was roused)
to the spot appointed for my signal. The
boat appeared opposite the mouth of the
cave. Every thing answered my expec-
tation.	;

“ There,” said I, pointing to the boat,
** there are my armed friends : they have a

tour-pounder—the match is ready lighted
—your plot is discovered. Go in to your
confederates in that cave; tell them so.
The trap-door is secured above ; there is no
escape for them : bid them surrender : if
they attempt to rush out, the grape-shot
will pour upon them, and they are dead
men.”

I cannot say, that my rebel captain
showed himself as stout as I could have
wished, for the honour of my victory. The
surprise disconcerted him totally: I felt
him tremble under my grasp. He obeyed
my orders—went into the cave to bring his
associates to submission. His parley with
them, however, was not immediately suc-
cessful : I suppose there were some braver
fellows than he amongst them, whose coun-
sel might be for open war. In the mean-
time bur yeomen landed, and surrounded
the cave on all sides, so that there was no
possibility of escape for those within. At
last they yielded themselves our prisoners.
I am sorry I have no bloody battle for the
entertainment of such of my readers as like
horrours; but so it was, that they yielded
without a drop of blood being spilled, or a

shot fired. We let them out of their hiding-
place one by one, searching each as he
issued forth, to be secure that they had no
concealed weapons. After they had given
up the arms which were concealed in the
cave, the next question was, what to do
with our prisoners. As it was now late,
and they could not all be examined and
committed with due legal form to the county
gaol, Mr. McLeod advised, that we should
detain them in the place they had chosen
for themselves till morning. Accordingly,
in the cave we again stowed them, and left
a guard at each entrance, to secure them
for the night. We returned to the castle.
I stopped at the gate to- tell Ellinor and
Christy that I was safe. They were sitting
up, watching for the news. The moment
Ellinor saw me, she clasped her hands in
an ecstasy of joy, but could not speak.
Christy was voluble in his congratulations ;
but, in the midst of his rejoicing, he could
not help reproaching me with forgetting to
give him the bluriderbu.sk, and to let him
have a bit of the fighting. <‘c Upon my
honour,” said I, “ there was none, * or you
should have been there.”

II Oh, don’t be plaguing and gathering
round him now,” said Ellinor; cc sure, he is
tired, and look how hot—no wonder—let
him get home and to bed: I’ll run and warm
it with the pan myself, and not be trusting
them.”

She would not be persuaded, that I did
not desire to have my bed warmed, but, by
some short cut, got in before us. On en-
tering the castle hall, I found her, with the
warming-pan in her hand, held back by the
inquisitive servants, who were all question-
ing her about the news, of which she was
the first, and not very intelligible enun-
ciator.

I called for bread and water for my pri-
soner in the strong-room, and then I heard
various exclamations of wonder.

“ Ay, it is all true ! it is no jest ! Joe is
at the bottom of all. / never liked Joe
Kelly—/always knew Joe was not the right
thing—and I always said so ; and I, and I,
and I. And it was but last week I was
saying so : and it was but yesterday I said
so and so.”

I passed through the gossiping crowd with

bread and water for my culprit. M‘Leod
instantly saw and followed me.

“ I will make bold to come with vou,”

%/ J

said he; <c a pent rat’s a dangerous animal.”

I thanked him, and acquiesced; but there
was no need for the precaution. When we
opened the door, we found the conscience
or terrour-struck wretch upou his knees,
and, in the most abject terms, he implored
our mercy. From the windows of the room,
which looked into the castle yard, he had
heard enough to guess all that had hap-
pened. I could not bear to look at him.
After I had* set down his food, he clung to
my knees, crying and whining in a most
unmanly manner. M‘Leod, with indigna-
tion, loosened him from me, threw him
back, and locked the door.

“ Cowardice and treachery,” said he,
“ usually go together.”

C£ And courage and sincerity,” said I.—
“ And now we’ll go to supper, my good
friends. I hope you are all as hungry as I
am.”

I never did eat any meal with so much
appetite.

“ Tis a pity, my lord,” said McLeod,
te but what there was a conspiracy against
you every day of your life, it seems to do
you so much good.”

CHAPTER XVI.

“ What new wonders? What new misfor-
tunes, Ellinor,” said I, as Ellinor, with a
face of consternation, appeared again in the
morning in my room, just as I was going
down to breakfast: “ what new misfortunes,
Ellinor ?”

“ Oh ! the worst that could befall me!”
cried she, wringing her hands ; “ the worst,
the very worst !—to be the death of my
own child !” said she, with inexpressible
horrour. “ Oh ! save him ! save him ! for
the love of Heaven, dear, save him ! If you
don’t save him, *tis I shall be his death.”

She was in such agony, that she could
not explain herself further for some minutes.

*• It was I gave the information against
them all to you. But how could I ever have
thought Owen was one of them ? My son,
my own son, the unfortunate cratur ; I never
thought but what he was with the militia far
away. And how could it ever come into

my head, that Owen could have any hand
in a thing of the kind ?”

“ But I did not see him last night,” in-
terrupted I.

“ Oh ! he was there ! One of his own
friends, one of the military that went with
you saw him among the prisoners, and came
just now to tell me of it. That Owen should
be guilty of the like Î Oh ! what could have
come over him ! He must have been out of
his rason. And against you to be plotting I
That's what I never will believe, if even I’d
hear it from himself. But he's among them
that were taken last night. And will I live
to see him go to gaol ?—and will I live to
see—No, I'd rather die first, a thousand
and a thousand times over. Oh ! for mercy's
sake !” said she, dropping on her knees at
my feet, c< have pity on me, and don't let
the blood of my own child be upon me in
my old days.”

“ What would you have me do, Ellinor r”
said I, much moved by her distress.

“ There is but one thing to do,” said she.
<c Let him off: sure, a word from you would
be enough for the soldiers that are over
them on guard. And Mr. M‘Leod has not

yet seen him ; and if he was just let escape,
there would be no more about it; and I’d
engage he shall fly the country, the unfor-
tunate cratur ! and never trouble you more*
This is all I ask; and sure, dear, you can’t
refuse it to your own Eilinor; your old
nurse, that carried ye in her arms, and fed
ye with her milk, and watched over ye
many’s the long night, and loved ye : ay,
none ever loved, or could love ye, so well.”

“ I am sensible of it; I am grateful,” in-
terrupted I : “ but what you ask of me,
Eilinor, is impossible—I cannot let him
escape; but I will do my utmost.”

“ Troth, nothing will save him, if you
would not say the word for him now. Ah !
why cannot you let him off then ?”

“ I should lose my honour ; I should lose
my character. You know that I have been
accused of favouring the rebels already—
you saw the consequences of my protect-
ing your other son, though he was innocent
and injured, and bore an excellent cha-
racter.”

“ Christy; ay, true: but poor Owen, un-
lucky as he is and misguided, has a better
claim upon you.”

“ How can that be ? Is not the other my
foster-brother in the first place ?”

“ True, for him.”

“ And had not I proofs of his generous
conduct and attachment to me ?”

“ Owen is nat’rally fonder of you by a
great deal,” interrupted she; “ I’ll answer
for that.”

“ What ! when he has just been detected
in conspiring against my life.”

“ That’s what I’ll never believe,” cried
Ellinor, vehemently: " that he might be
drawn in may be, when out of his rason—
he was always a wild boy—to be a united-
man, and to hope to get you for his cap-
tain, might be the case, and bad enough
that; but, jewel, you’ll find he did never
conspire against you : I’d lay down my life
upon that.”

She threw herself again at my feet, and
clung to my knees.

* “ As you hope for mercy yourself in this
world, or the world to come, show some
now, and do not be so hard-hearted as to
be the death of both mother and son.”

Her supplicating looks and gestures, her
words, her tears, moved me so much, that

I was on the point of yielding ; but recol-
lecting what was due to justice and to my
own character, with an effort of what I
thought virtuous resolution I repeated,

“ It is impossible: my goodEllinor, urge
me no farther : ask any thing else, and it
shall be granted, but this is impossible.”

As I spoke, I endeavoured to raise her
from the ground ; but, with the sudden
force of angry despair, she resisted.

“ No, you shall not raise me,” cried she.
“ Here let me lie, and break my heart with
your cruelty ! Tis a judgement upon me—
it’s a judgement, and it’s fit I should feel it
as I do. But you shall feel too, in spite of
your hard heart. Yes, your heart is harder
than the marble: you want the natural
touch, you do ; for your mother has knelt
at your feet, and you have denied her
prayer.’*

“ My mother !”

“ And what was her prayer ? to save the
life of your brother.”

“ My brother ! Good heavens ! what do
I hear !”

“ You hear the truth : you hear that I
am your lawful mother. Yes, you are my

son. You have forced that secret from me,
which I thought to have carried with me to
my grave. And now you know all ; and
now you know how wicked I haye been,
and it was all for you ; for you that refused
me the only thing ever I asked, and that,
too, in my greatest distress, when my heart
was just breaking : and all this time too,
there’s Christy—poor good Christy ; he that
I’ve wronged, and robbed of his rightful in-
heritance, has been as a son, a dutiful good
son to me, and never did he deny me any
thing I could ask, but in you I have found
no touch of tenderness. Then it’s fit I
should tell you again, and again, and again,
that he who is now slaving at the forge, to
give me the earnings of his labour ; he that
lives, and has lived all his days upon po-
tatoes and salt, and is content ; he who has
the face and the hands so disguised with
the smoke and the black, that yourself
asked him t’other day, did he ever wash
his face since he was bom—I tell ye, he it
is who should live in this castle, and sleep
on that soft bed, and be lord of ail here—^
he is the true and real Lord Glenthorn, and
to the wide world I’ll make it known. Ay,

be pale and tremble, do, it’s your turn now :
I’ve touched you now ; but it’s too late. In
the face of day I shall confess the wrong
I’ve done ; and I shall call upon you to give
back to him all that by right is his own.”
Ellinor stopped short, for one of my ser-
vants at this instant came into the room.

“ My lord, Mr. McLeod desires me to
let you know the guard has brought up the
prisoners, and he is going to commit them
to gaol, and would be glad to know if you
choose to see them first, my lord.”

Stupified by all I had just heard, I could
only reply, that I would come presently.
Ellinor rushed past the servant—ce Are they
come?” cried she. “ Where will I get a
sight of them ?” I staid for a few minutes
alone, to decide upon what I ought to say
and do. A multitude of ideas, more than
had ever come into my mind in a twelve-
month, passed through it in these few mi-
nutes. As I was slowlv descending the

%j	O

great stair-case, Ellinor came running, as
fast as she could run, to the foot of the stairs,
exclaiming,

“ It’s a mistake ! it’s all a mistake, and I
was a fool to believe them that brought me

the word. Sure Ody’s not there at all ! nor
ever was in it. I’ve seen them all, face to
face, and my son’s not one of them, nor ever
was ; and I was a fool from beginning to
end; and I beg your pardon entirely,” whis-
pered she, coming close to my ear. “ I
was out of my reason at the thought of that
boy’s being to suffer, and I, his mother, the
cause of it. Forgive all I said in my pas-
sion, my own best jewel : you was always
good and tender to me, and be the same
still, dear. I’ll never say a word more about
it to any one living ; the secret shall die
with me. ' Sure, when my conscience has
borne it so long, it may strive and bear it a
little longer for your sake : and it can’t be
long I have to live, so that will make all
easy. Hark! they are asking for you. Do
you go your ways into the great parlour, to
Mr. M‘Leod, and think no more of any-
thing at all but joy. My son’s not one of
them ! I must go to the forge and tell
Christy the good news.”

Ellinor departed, quite satisfied with her-
self, with me, and with all the world. She
took it for granted, that she left me in the
same state of mind, and that I should obey

her injunctions, and think of nothing but
joy. Of what happened in the great par-
lour, and of the examinations of the prison-
ers, I have but a confused recollection. I
remember that Mr. M'Leod seemed rather
surprised by my indifference to what con-
cerned me so nearly; and that he was
obliged to do all the business himself. The
men were, I believe, all committed to gaol,
and Joe Kelly turned king’s evidence; but
as to any further particulars, I know no
more than if I had been in a dream. The
discovery, which Ellinor had just made to
me, engrossed all my powers of attention.

CHAPTER XVII.

“ Le vrai n’est pas toujours vraisemblable/’
says an acute observer of human affairs.
The romance of real life certainly goes be-
yond all other romances; and there are
facts, which few writers would dare to put
into a book, as there are skies which few
painters would venture to put into a picture.

When I had leisure to reflect, I consi-
dered, that as yet I had no proof of the
truth of Ellinor’s strange story, except her
own assertions. I sent for her again to ex-
amine her more particularly. I was aware,
that, if I alarmed her, I should so confuse
her imagination, that I should never obtain
the truth; therefore I composed myself, and
assumed my usual external appearance of
non-chalance. I received her lolling upon
my sofa, as usual, and I questioned her
merely as if to gratify an idle curiosity.

“ Troth, dear,” said she, I’ll tell you
the whole story how it was, to make your

mind as y, which, God knows, mine never
was, from that minute it first came into my
head, till this very time being. You mind
the time you got the cut in your head—
no, not you, jewel; but the little lord that
was then, Christy there below that is.—
Well, the cut was a terrible cut as ever you
seen, got by a fall on the fender from the
nurse’s arms, that was drunk, three days
after he was born.”

“ I remember to have heard my father
talk of some accident of this sort, which
happened to me when I was an infant.”

“ Ay, sure enough it did, and that was
what first put him in the notion of taking the
little lord out of the hands of the Dublin
nurse-tenders, and them that were about my
Lady Glenthorn, and did not know how to
manage her, which was the cause of her
death : and he said he’d have his own way
about his son and heir any way, and have
him nursed by a wholesome woman in a
cabin, and brought up hardy, as he, and
the old lord, and all the family, were before
him. So with that he sends for me, and
he puts the young lord, God bless him, into
my arms himself, and a donmj thing he was

that same time to look at, for he was but
just out of the surgeon’s hands, the head
just healed and scarred over like; and my
lord said, there should be no more doctors
never about him. So I took him, that is,
Christy, and you, to a house at the sea, for
the salt water, and showed him every justice ;
and my lord often came to see him whilst
he was in the country ; but then he was off,
after a time, to Dublin, and I was in a lone
place, where nobody came, and the child
was very sick with me, and you was all the
time as fine and thriving a child as ever you
see ; and I thought, to be sure, one night,
that he would die wid me. lie was very
bad, very bad indeed; and Ï was sitting up
in bed, rocking him backwards and for-
wards this ways : I thought with myself,
what a pity it was the young lord should
die, and he an only son and heir, and the
estate to go out of the family the Lord
knows where ; and then the grief the father
would be in: and then I thought, how hap-
py he would be if he had such a fine bablnj
as you, dear; and you was a fine babby to
be sure: and then I thought, how happy it
would be for you, if you was in the place

of the little lord : and then it came into
my head, just like a shot, where would be
the harm to change you ? for I thought the
real lord would surely die; and then, what
a gain it would be to all, if it was never
known, and if the dead child was carried
to the grave, since it must go, as only
poor Ellinor O’Donoghoe’s, and no more
about it. Well, if it was a wicked thought,
it was the devil himself put it in my head,
to be sure; for, only for him, I should never
have had the sense to think of such a thing,
for I was always innocent like, and not
worldly given. But so it was, the devil put
it in my head, and made me do it, and
showed me how, and all in a minute. So,
I mind, your eyes and hair were both of
the very same colour, dear; and as to the
rest, there’s no telling how those young
things alter in a few months, and my lord
would not be down from Dublin in a hurry,
so I settled it all right ; and as there was no
likelihood at all the real lord would live,
that quieted my conscience ; for I argued,
it was better the father should have any
sort of child at all than none. So, when
my lord came down, I carried him the child

to see, that is you, jewel. He praised me
greatly for all the care I had taken of his
boy; and said, how finely you was come
on ; and I never see a father in greater joy;
and it would have been a sin, I thought, to
tell him the truth, after he took the change
that was put upon him so well, and it made
him so happy like. Well, I was afeard of
my life he’d puli off the cap to search for
the scar, so I would not let your hea,d be
touched any way, dear, saying it was tinder
and soft still with the fall, and you’d cry
if. the cap was stirred, and so I made it out,
indeed, very well ; for, God forgive me, I
twitched the string under your chin, dear,
and made you cry like mad, when they
would come to touch you. So there was
no more about it, and I had you home to
myself, and, all in good time, the hair grew,
and fine thick hair it was, God bless you ;
and so there was no more about it, and I
got into no trouble at all ; for it all fell out
just as I had laid it out, except that the
real little young lord did not die as I
thought; and it was a wonder but he did,
for you never saw none so near death, and
backwards and forwards, what turns of sick-

ness be took with me for months upon
months, and year after year, so that none
could think, no more than me, there was
any likelihood at all of rearing of him to
man’s estate. So that kept me easier in
my mind concerning what I’d done ; for,
as I kept saying to myself, better the family
should have an heir to the estate, suppose
not the right, than none at all ; and if the
father, nor nobody, never found it out,
there was he and all the family made happy
for life, and my child made a lord of, and
none the wiser or the worse. Well, so I
down-argued my conscience ; and any way
I took to little Christy, as he was now to
be called—and I loved him, all as one as if
he was my own—not that he was ever as
well-looking as Ody, or any of the childer
I had, but I never made any differ betwixt
him and any of my own—he can’t say as I
did, any how, and he has no reason to com-
plain of my being an unnat’ral mother to
him, and being my foster-child I had a
right to love him as I did, and I never
wronged him any way, except in the one
article of changing him at nurse, which he
being an infant, and never knowing, was

never a bit the worse for, nor never will,
now. So all’s right, dear, and make your
mind asy, jewel; there’s the whole truth of
the story for you.”

“ But it is a very strange story, Ellinor,
after all, and—and I have only your word
for it, and may be you are only taking ad-
vantage of my regard for you to make me
believe you.”

cf What is it, plase your honour ?” said
she, stepping forward, as if she did not hear
or understand me.

“ I say, Ellinor, that after all I have no
proof of the truth of this story, except your
word.”

“ And is not that enough, and where’s
the use of having more ; but if it will make
you asy, sure I can give you proof—sure
need you go farther than the sear on his
head ? If he was shaved to-morrow, I’d
engage you’d see it fast enough ; but, sure,
can’t you put your hand up to your head
this minute, and feel there never was no
scar there, nor if all the hair you have,
God save the mark, was shaved this minute,
never a bit of a scar would be to be seen ;
but proof is it you want ?—why there’s the

surgeon that dressed the cut in the child’s
head, before he ever came to me, sure he’s
the man that can’t forget it, and that will
tell all ; so to make your mind asy, see him^
dear, but for your life don’t let him see
your head to feel it, for he’d miss the scar,
and might suspect something by your going
to question him.”

“ Where does he live ? interrupted L
“ Not above twelve miles off.”

“ Is he alive?”

“ Ay, if he been’t dead since Candle-
mas.”

At first I thought of writing to this man,
but afterwards, being afraid of committing
myself by writing, I went to him ; he had
long before this time left off business, and
had retired to enjoy his fortune in the de-
cline of life. He was a whimsical sort of
character; he had some remains of his for-
mer taste for anatomy, and was a collector
of curiosities. I found him just returned
from a lake which he had been dragging
formoose-deer’s horns, to complete the skele-
ton of a moose-deer which he had mount-
ed in his hall. I introduced myself, desiring
to see his museum, and mentioned to him

the thigh-bone of a giant found in my neigh-
bourhood, then by favour of this bone I
introduced the able cure, that he had made
of a cut in my head, when I was a child.

“ A cut in your head, sir ? Yes, my lord,
I recollect perfectly well, it was a very ugly
cut, especially in an infant’s head ; but I
am glad to find you feel no bad effects from
it. Have you any cicatrice on the place ?
Eleven feet high, did you say; and is the
giant’s skeleton in your neighbourhood ?”

I humoured his fancy, and by degrees he
gave me all the information I wanted, with-
out in the least suspecting my secret mo-
tives. He described the length, breadth,
and depth of the wound to me; showed
me just where it was on the head, and ob-
served that it must have left an indelible
mark, but that my fine hair covered it.
When he seemed disposed to search for it,
I defended myself with the giant’s thigh-
bone, and warded off his attacks most suc-
cessfully. To satisfy me upon this point, I
affected to think that he had not been paid;
he said he had been amply paid, and he
showed me his books to prove it. I ex-
amined the dates, and found that they

agreed with Ellinor’s precisely. On my
return home, the first thing I did was to
make Christy a present of a new wig, which
I was certain would induce him to shave
his head, for the lower Irish agree with the
beaux and belles of London and Paris, in
preferring wigs to their own hair. Ellinor
told me, that I might safely let his head be
shaved, because, to her certain knowledge,
he had scars of so many cuts, which he had
received at fairs upon his scull, that there
would appear nothing particular in one
more or less. As soon as the head was
shaved, and the wig was worn, I took an
opportunity one day of stopping at the
forge to have one of my horse’s shoes
changed, and whilst this was doing, I took
notice of his new wig, and how well it fitted
him y as I expected, he took it off to show
it me better, and to pay his own compliments
to it.

“ Sure enough, you are a very fine wig,”
said he, apostrophising it as he held it up
on the end of his hammer, “ and God bless
him that give it me, and it fits me as tight
as if it was nailed to my head.”

“ You seem to have had a good many

nails in your head already, Christy,” said
I, “ if one may judge by all these scars.”

“ Oh yes, ..ease your honour, my lord.”
said he, “ there’s no harm in them neither ;
they are scratches got when I was no wiser
than I should be, at fairs, fighting with the
boys of Shrawd-na-scoob.”

Whilst he fought his battles o’er again, I
had leisure to study his head, and I traced
precisely all the boundary lines. The situa-
tion, size, and figure of the cicatrice, which
the surgeon and Ellinor had described to
me, were so visible and exact, that no doubt
could remain in my mind of Christy’s being
the real son of the late Lord and Lady Glen-
thorn. This conviction was still more im-
pressed upon my mind a few days after-
wards. I recollected having seen a pile of
family pictures in a lumber-room in the
castle, and I rummaged them out to see if
I could discover amongst them any likeness
to Christy :	I	^found	one,	the	picture	of

my grandfather, I, should say of his grand-
father, to which Christy bore a striking re-
semblance, when I saw him with his face
washed, and inv his Sunday clothes.

My mjnd being now perfectly satisfied

of the truth of Ellinor’s story, I was next
to consider how I ought to act. To be or
not to be Lord Glenthorn; or in other
words, to be or not to be a villain, was now
the question. I could not dissemble to my
conscience this plain state of the case, that
I had no right to keep possession of that
which I knew to be another’s lawful pro-
perty : yet, educated as I had been, and
accustomed to the long enjoyment of those
luxuries, which become necessaries to the
wealthy; habituated to attendance as I
had been, and even amongst the dissipated
and idle, notorious for extravagance the
most unbounded and indolence the most
inveterate, how was I at once to change my
habits, to abdicate my rank and power, to
encounter the evils of poverty ? I was not
compelled to make such sacrifices; for
though Ellinor’s transient passion had
prompted her to threaten me with a public
discovery, yet I knew that she would as
soon cut off her own right hand, as execute
her threats. Her affection for me, and her
pride in my consequence were so strong,
that I knew I might securely rely upon her
secrecy. The horrid idea of being the

cause of the death of one of her own child-
ren had for a moment sufficient power to
balance her love for me ; yet there was but
little probability, that any similar trial
should occur, nor had I reason to appre-
hend, that the reproaches of her conscience
should induce her to make a voluntary dis-
covery ; for all her ideas of virtue depended
on the principle of fidelity to the objects of
her affection, and no scrupulous notions of
justice disturbed her understanding, or
alarmed her self-complacency. Conscious
that she would willingly sacrifice all she
had in the world for any body she loved,
and scarcely comprehending that any one
could be selfish, she* in a confused way,
applied the maxim of—c Do as you would
be done by,’ and was as generous of the
property of others, as of her own. At the
worst, if a law-suit commenced against me,
I knew that possession wras nine tenths of
the law*. I also knew, that Ellinor’s health
was declining, and that the secret would
die with her. Unlawful possession of the
wealth I enjoyed, could not, however, satis-
fy my own mind; and, after a severe con-
flict between my love of ease, and my sense

of right—between my tastes and my prin-
ciples, I determined to act honestly and
honourably, and to relinquish what I could
no longer maintain without committing in-
justice and feeling remorse. I was, per-
haps, the more ready to do rightly, because
I felt that I was not compelled to it. The
moment when I made this virtuous decision
was the happiest I had at that time ever
felt; my mind seemed suddenly relieved
from an oppressive weight; my whole frame
glowed with new life, and the consciousness
of courageous integrity elevated me so much
in my own opinion, that titles, and rank,
and fortune, appeared as nothing in my
estimation. I rang my bell eagerly, and
ordered, that Christy O’Donoghoe should
be immediately sent for. The servant went
instantly, but it seemed to me an immode-
rately long time before Christy arrived. I
walked up and down the room impatiently,
and at last threw myself at full length upon
a sofa—the servant returned.

“ The smith is below in the hall, my
lord.”

“ Show him up.”—île was shown up into
the antichamber.

Ck The smith is at the door, my lord.”

“ Show him in, cannot you ? What de-
tains him ?”

“ My brogues, my lord ! I’d be afraid to
come in with ’em on the carpet.” Saying
this, Christy canre in, stepping fearfully,
astonished to find himself in a splendid
drawing-room.

“ Were you never in this room before,
Christy?” said I.

<c Never, my lord, plase your honour,
barring the day I mended the bolt.”

“ It is a fine room, is not it Christy?”
“Troth it is, the finest ever I see, sure
enough.”

“ How should you like to have such a
room of you own, Christy ?”

“ Is it I ? plase your honour,” replied
he, laughing, “ what should I do with the
like ?”

“ How should you feel if you were master
of this great castle?”

“ It’s a poor figure I should make, to be
sure,” said he, turning his head over his
shoulder towards the door, and resting upon
the lock, “ I’d rather be at the forge by a
great dale.”

“ Are you sure of that, Christy ? Should
not you like to be able to live without work-
ing any more, and to have horses and ser-
vants of your own?”

“ What would I do with them, plase
your honour, I that have never been used
to them? sure they’d all laugh at me, and
I’d not be the better o’that, no more than
of having nothing to do ; I that have been
always used to the work, what should I do
all the day without it? But sure, my lord,”
continued he, changing his voice to a more
serious tone, “ the horse that I shod yester-
day for your honour did not go lame, did
he?”

“ The horse is very well shod, I believe ;
I have not ridden him since—I know no-
thing of the matter.”

“ Because ! was thinking, may be, it
was that made your honour send for me up
in the hurry—I was afeard I’d find your

honour mad with me, and I’d be verv sorrv

* * +>

to disoblige you, my lord; and I’m glad
to see your honour looking so well after ail
the trouble you’ve been put to by them
rubbles, Ahe villains, to be consctirting against
you under-ground—But thanks be to God,

you have ’em all in gaol now—I though,
my mother would have died of the fright
she took, when the report came, that Ody
was one of them. I told her there could
not be no truth in it at all, but she would
not mind me—It would be a strange unila-
teral thing indeed of any belonging to her
to be plotting against your honour. I knew
Ody could not be in it, and be a brother
of mine, and that’s what I kept saying all
the time; but she never heeded me, for
your honour knows, when the women are
frighted, and have taken a thing into their
heads, you can’t asy get it out again.”

“ Very true; but to return to what I was
saying—Should not you like to change
places with me, if you could?”

Your honour, my lord, is a very happy
jantleman, and a very good jantleman,
there’s no doubt, and there’s few but would
be proud to be like you in any thing at all.”
“ Thank you for that compliment; but
now, in plain English, as to yourself, would
you like to be in my place—to change
places with me ?”

“ In your honour's place—I ! I would
not, my lord, and that’s the truth now,’

said he, decidedly. “ I would not, no
offence, your honour bid me to speak the
truth, for I’ve all I want in the world, a
good mother, and a good wife, and good
childer, and a reasonable good little cabin,
and my little pratces, and the grazing of
the cow, and work enough always, and not
called on to slave, and I get my health,
thank God, for all; and what more could I
have if I should be made a lord to morrow ?
Sure, my good woman would never make a
lady, and what should I do with her ? I’d
be griev’d to see her the laughing-stock of
high and low, besides being the same my-
self, and my boy after me. That would
never answer for me, so I am not like them
that would overturn all to get uppermost ;
I never had any hand, art or part, in a thing
of the kind; I always thought and knew I
was best as I am ; not, but what if I wras
to change with any, it is with you, my lord,
I would be proud to change, because if I
was to be a jantleman at all, I’d wish to be
of a ra-al good ould family born.”

“ You are then what you wish to be,”
said I.

“ Och !” said he, laughing, and scratch-

ing his head, “ your honour's jesting me
about them kings of Ireland, that they say
the O’Donoghoe’s was once, but that’s what
I never think on> that’s all idle talk for the
like of me, for sure that’s a long time ago,
and what use going back to it, one might
as well be going back to Adam, that was
the father of all, but which makes no differ
now.”

“ But you do not understand me,” inter-
rupted I ; c< I am not going back to the
kings of Ireland, I mean to tell you, that
you were born a gentleman—nay, I am
perfectly serious, listen to me.”

“ I do, plase your -honour, though it'is
mocking me, I know you are, I would be
sorry not take a joke as well as another.”

“ This is no joke; I repeat, that Ï am
serious ; you are not only a gentleman, but
a nobleman—to you this castle and this
great estate belongs, and to you they shall
be surrendered.”

He stood astonished, and his eyes open-
ing wide, showed a great circle of white in
his black face.

Eh !” cried he, drawing that long breath.

which astonishment had suppressed, “ But
how can this be?”

“ Your mother can explain better than
I can—your mother, did I say? she is not
your mother. Lady Glenthorn was your
mother.”

<f I can’t understand it at all—I can’t un-
derstand it at all. I’ll lave it all to your
honour,” said he, making amotion with his
hands, as if to throw from him the trouble
of comprehending it.

cc Did you never hear of such a thing as
a child’s being changed at nurse ?”

“ I did, plase your honour; but my mo-
ther would never do the like. I’ll answer for
hery any way ; and them that said any thing
of the kind belied her, and don’t be believ-
ing them, my lord.”

“ But Ellinôr was the person who told
me this secret.”

“ Was she so ? Oh, she must have been
draaming : she was always too good a
mother to me to have sarved me so. But,”
added he, struggling to clear his intellects,
“ you say it’s not my mother she is ? but
"whose mother is she then? can it be that

she is yours? his not possible to think such
a great lord was the son of such as her, to
look at you both: and was you the son of
my father Johnny Donoghoe? IIow is that
again ?”

Pie rubbed his forehead, and I could
scarcely forbear laughing at his odd per-
plexity, though the subject was of such
serious importance. When he clearly uun-
derstood the case, and thoroughly believed
the truth, he did not seem elated by this
sudden change of fortune : he really thought
more of me than of himself.

<c Well, I’ll tell you what you will do
then,” continued he, after a pause of deep
reflection ; “ say nothing to nobody, but
just keep asy on, even as we are. Don’t
let there be any surrendering at all, and I’ll
speak to my mother, that is, Eilinor O’Do-
noghoe, and settle it so ; and let it be so
Settled, in the name of God, and no more
about it ; and none need never be the
wiser; ’tis so best for all. A good day to
your honour, and I’ll go shoe the mare.”

“ Stay,” said I ; “ you may hereafter re-
pent of this sudden determination: I insist
upon your taking four-and-twenty hours—

no, that would he too little-take a month
to consider of it coolly, and then let me
know your final determination.”

“ Oh ! plase your honour, I will say the
same then as now. It would be a poor
thing indeed of me, after all you done for
me and mine, to be putting you to more
trouble. It would be a poor thing of me
to forget how you liked to have lost your
life all along with me at the time of the
'ruction. No, I’ll not take the fortin from
you any how.”

“ Put gratitude to me out of the ques-
tion,” said I. tc Far be it from me to take
advantage of your affectionate temper. I
do not consider you as under any obligations
to me ; nor will I be paid for doing justice.”
“ Sure enough, your honour desarved to
be born a gentleman,” said Christy.

“ At least I have been bred a gentleman,”
said I. “ Let. me see you again this day
month, and not till then.”

“ ^ ou shall not—that is, you shall, plase
your honour: but, for fear any one would
suspect any thing, I’d best go shoe the
mare, any way.”

CHAPTER XVIII.

" What riches give us, let us then inquire—

“ Meat, fire, and clothes—What more ?—Meat, clothes,
and fire.”

The philosophy we learn from books makes
but a faint impression upon the mind, in
comparison with that which we are taught
by our own experience: and we sometimes
feel surprised to find, that what we have
been taught as maxims of morality prove
true in real life. After having had, for
many years, the fullest opportunities of
judging of the value of riches, when I re-
flected upon my past life, I perceived that
their power of conferring happiness is li-
mited, nearly as the philosophic poet de-
scribes : that all the changes and modifi-
cations of luxury must, in the sum of actual
physical enjoyment, be reduced to a few
elementary pleasures, of which the industri-
ous poor can obtain their share: a small

share, perhaps; but then it is enjoyed with
a zest that makes it equal in value, perhaps,
to the largest portion offered to the sated
palate of ennui. These truths are as old
astthe world, but they appeared quite new
to me, when I discovered them by my own
experience.

During the month which I had allowed
to my foster-brother for reflection, I had
leisure to philosophise, and my understand-
ing made a rapid progress. I foresaw the
probability of Christy’s deciding to become
Earl of Glenthorn ; notwithstanding that
his good sense had so clearly demonstrated
to him in theory, that, with his education
and habits, he must be happier working in
his forge, than he could be as Lord of Glen-
thorn Castle. I was not dismayed by the
idea of losing my wealth and rank ; I wras
pleased with myself for my honest conduct,
and conscious of a. degree of pleasure from
my own approbation, superior to what my
riches had ever procured.

The day appointed for Christy’s final de-
termination arrived. I knew, by the first
motion of his shoulder as he came into the
room, what his decision would be.

“ Well, Christy,” said I, “ you will be
Earl of Glenthorn, I perceive. You are
glad now that I did not take you at your
word, and that I gave you a month’s time
for consideration.”

“ Your honour was always considerate: '
but if Ed wish now to be changing my
mind,” said he, hesitating, and shifting from
leg to leg, “ it is not upon my own account
any way, but upon my son Johnny’s.”

“ My good friend,” said I, “ no apology
is necessary. I should be very unjust if I
were offended by your decision, and very
mean if, after the declarations I have made,

I could, for an instant, hesitate to restore
to you that property, which it is your right
and your choice to reclaim.”

Christy made a low bow, and seemed
much at a loss what he was to say next.

“ I hope,” continued I, “ that you will be
as happy when you are Earl of Glenthorn,
as you have been as Christy O’Donoghoe.”

“ May be not, please your honour; but',

I trust, my childer will be happy after me;
and it’s them and my wife I’m thinking of,
as in duty bound. But it is hard your ho-
nour should be astray for want of the fortin

you’ve been bred to; and this weighs witfc
me greatly on the other side. If your ho-
nour could live on here, and share with us
—But I see your honour’s displeased at my
naming that. # It was my wife thought
o’that; I knew it could not do. But then,
what I think is, that your honour should
name what you would be pleased to keep
to live upon ; for, to be sure, you have a
right to live as a gentleman, that have al-
ways lived as one, as every body knows,
and none better than I. Would your ho-
nour be so kind, then, as just to put down
on a bit of paper, what you’d wish to keep,
and that same, whatever it is, none shall
touch but yourself ; and I would not own
a child for mine that would begrudge it you.
I’ll step down and wait below, while your
honour writes what you phase.”

The generosity of this man touched me
to the heart. I accepted from him three
hundred a-year ; and requested, that the
annuity I allowed to the unfortunate Lady
Glenthorn might be continued ; that the
house which I had built for Ellinor, and the
land belonging to it, might be secured to
her rent-free for life; and that all my

debts should be paid. I recommended Mr.
M‘Leod in the strongest manner, as an agent
whose abilities and integrity would be to
him an invaluable treasure.

Christy, when I gave him the paper on
which I had stated these requests, took a
pen instantly, and would have signed his
name without reading it ; but to this I ab-
solutely objected.

“ Well then,” said he, cc I’ll take it home,
and read it over, and take time, as you de-
sire, to consider. There’s no danger of my
changing my mind about this : I hope your
honour can’t think there is.”

The next day, on returning it to me, he
observed, that it was making very little of
him to put down only such a trifle, and he
pressed me to make the hundreds thou-
sands: this I refused.

“ But I hope your honour won’t object to
what I’m going to propose. Is not there a
house in London ? and is not there another
in England; in the country? and, sure, I
and mine can’t live there and here and every
where at once : if you’d just condescend to
occupy one of them, you’d do me a great
pleasure, and a great sarvice too; for every

thing would be right, instead of going
wrong, as it might under an agent, and me
at a distance, that does not know well how
to manage such great estates. I hope you’ll
not refuse me that, if it’s only to show me
I don’t lose your honour’s good-will.”

The offer was made with so much earnest-
ness, and even delicacy, that I could not
abruptly refuse it at the moment, though
one of these magnificent houses could be of
no use to me with an income of 300I. per
annum.

“ As to the annuity,” continued Christy,
“ that shall be paid as punctual as the day :
Mr. M‘Leod will pay it ; and he shall have
it all settled right, and put upon a stamp,
by the lawyers, in case any thing should
happen me. Then, as to Ellinor, sure, she
is my mother, for I never can think of her
any other way ; and, except in that single
article of changing me at nurse, was always
the best of mother’s to me. And even that
same trick she played me, though very
wicked, to be sure, was very nat’ral—ay,
very nat’ral—to prefar her own flesh and
blood if she could : and no one could be
more sorry for the wrong she did me than

she is now : there she is crying at home,
ready to break her heart : but, as I tell her,
there’s no use in repenting a thing when
once it is done; and as I forgive her, none
can ever bring it up against her : and as to
the house and farm, she shall surely have
that, and shall never want for any thing.
So I hope your honour’s mind will be asy
on that matter; and whatever else you re-
collect to wish, that, shall be done, if in my
power.”

It is with pleasure that I recollect and
record all these instances of goodness of
heart in poor Christy, which, notwithstand-
ing the odd mixture of absurdity and sense
in his language and ideas, will, I make no
doubt, please my readers, though they can-
not affect them as much as they affected
me.

I now prepared for my departure from
Glenthorn Castle, never more to return. To
spare me from unnecessary mortification,
Christy had the wonderful self-command to
keep the secret faithfully, so tlfat none of
the people in the neighbourhood, nor even
my servants, had the slightest idea of the
truth. Having long talked of returning to

England, the preparations for my journey
excited no surprise. Every thing went on
as usual, except that Christy, instead of
being at the forge, was almost every day at
the ale-house.

I thought it proper to speak openly of
my affairs to Mr. M‘Leod : he was the only
person who could make out a correct list of
my debts. Besides, I wished to recommend
him as agent to the future earl, to whom an
honest and able agent would be peculiarly
necessary, ignorant, as he was, both of the
world and of business ; and surrounded, as
he must probably be, on his accession to
his estate, by a herd of vulgar and design-
ing flatterers.

Albeit not easily moved to surprise, Mr.
McLeod really did, for an instant, look asto-
nished, when I informed him, that Christy
O’Donoghoe was Earl of Glenthorn. But
I must resolve not to stop to describe the
astonishment that each individual showed
upon this occasion, else I shall never have
finished my story.

It was settled that Mr. McLeod should
continue agent ; and, for his credit, I must
observe, that after he was made acquainted

with my loss of rank and fortune, he treated
me with infinitely more respect and regard,
than he had ever shown me whilst he con-
sidered me only as his employer. Our ac-
counts were soon settled; and, when this
was done, and they were all regularly signed,
Mr. McLeod came up to me, and, in a low
voice, of great emotion, said—

£C I am not a man of professions, but when
I say I am a man’s friend, I hope I shall
ever be found to be so, as far as can be in
my power ; and I cannot but esteem and
admire the man who has acted so nobly as
you have done.”

M‘Leod wrung my hand as he spoke,
and the tears stood in his eyes. I knew
that the feeling must indeed be strong, which
could extort from him even these few words
of praise, and this simple profession of re-
gard : but I did not know, till long after-
wards, the full warmth of his affections,
and energy of his friendship. The very
next day, unfortunately for me, he was
obliged to go to Scotland, to his mother,
who was dying, and at this time I saw no
more of him.

In due legal form I now made a surrender

of all claim upon the hereditary property of
the Earl of Glenthorn, and every thing was
in readiness for my journey. During this
tirpe, poor Ellinor never appeared at the
castle. I went to see her, to comfort her
about my going away ; but she was silent,
and seemingly sullen, and would not be
comforted.

“ IVe enough to grieve me,” said she: “ I
know what will be the end of all ; I see it
as plain as if you’d told me. There’s no
hiding nothing from a mother : no, there’s
no use in striving to comfort me.” Every
method which I tried to console her seemed
to grieve her more.

The day before that which was fixed for
my departure, I went to desire to see her.
This request I had repeatedly made, but
she had, from day to day, excused herself,
saying, that she was unwell, and that she
would be up on the morrow. At last she
came, and though but a few days had
elapsed since I had seen her, she was so
changed in her appearance, that I was
shocked the moment I beheld lier counte-

nance.

“ You don’t look well, Ellinor,” said I :
“ sit down.”

“ No matter whether I sit or stand,” said
she, calmly. “ I’m not long for this world :
I won’t live long after you are gone, that’s
one comfort.”

Her eyes were fixed and tearless ; and
there was a dead unnatural tranquillity in
her manner.

“ They are making a wonderful great
noise nailing up the boxes, and I seen them
cording the trunks as I came through the
hall. I asked them, could I be of any use :
but they said I could be of none, and that’s
true ; for, when I put my hand to the cord
to pull it, I had no more strength than an
infant. It was seven and twenty years last
Midsummer-day since I first had you an
infant in my arms. I was strong enough
then, and you was a sweet babby. Had I
seen that time, all that would come to pass
this dav Î But that’s over now. I have done
a wicked thing ; but I’ll send for Father
Murphy, and get absolution before I die.”
She sighed deeply, then went on speaking
more quickly.

“ But I can do nothing until you go.

What time will you go in the morning,
dear? It’s better go early. Is it in the
coach you’ll go ? I see it in the yard. But
I thought you must leave the coach, with
all the rest, to the rightful heir. But my
head’s not clear about it all, I believe—and
no matter.”

Her ideas rambled from one subject to
another in an unconnected manner. I en-
deavoured in vain to recall her understand-
ing, by speaking of her own immediate in-
terests ; of the house that was secured to
her for life; and of the promise that had
been made me, that she should never ivant
for any thing, and that she should be treated
with all possible kindness. She seemed to
listen to me, but showed that she did not
comprehend what I said, by her answers ;
and, at every pause I made, she repeated
the same question.

“ What time will you go in the morning,
dear ?”

At last I touched her feelings, and she
recovered her intellects, when I suddenly
asked, if she would accompany me to Eng-
land the next morning.

<c Ay, that I will !” cried she ; “ go with
you through the wide world.”

She burst into tears, and wept bitterly for
some time.

cc Ah ! now I feel right again,” said she ;
cc this is what I wanted; but could not cry
this many a day—never since the word came
to me, that you was going, and all was lost.”
I assured her, that I now expected to be
happier than I had ever been.

“ Oh !” cried she, <f and have you never
been happy all this time ? What a folly it
was for me, then, to do so wicked a thing !
and all my comfort was, the thinking you
was happy, dear. And what will become
of you now ? And is it on foot you’ll go ?”
Her thoughts rambled again.

“ Whatever way I go, you shall go with
me,” said I. “ You are my mother; and
now that your son has done what he knows
to be honest and just, ho will prosper in the
world, and will be truly happy ; and so
may you be happy, now that you have no-
thing more to conceal.”

She shook her head—

“ It’s too late,” said she, “ quite too late.
I often told Christy I would die before you

left this place, dear, and so I will, you will
see. God bless you ! God bless you ! and
pray to him to forgive me ! None that could
know what I’ve gone through would ever
do the like; no, not for their own child,
was he even such as you, and that would
be hard to find. God bless you, dear; I
shall never see you more! The hand of
death is upon me—God for ever bless you,
dear!”

She died that night; and I lost, in her,
the only human being who had ever shown
me warm disinterested affection. Her death
delayed, for a few days, my departure from
Glen thorn Castle. I staid to see her laid in
the grave. Her funeral was followed by
crowds of people ; by many, from the ge-
neral habit of attending funerals ; by many,
who wished to pay their court to me, in
showing respect to the memory of my nurse.

When the prayers over the dead were
ended, and the grave closed, just as the
crowd were about to disperse, I stood up
on a monument belonging to the Glenthorn
family; and the moment it was observed,
that I wished to address the multitude, the
moving waves were stilled, and there was a

dead silence. Every eye was fixed upon
me with eager expectation. It was the first
time in my life, that I had ever spoken be-
fore numbers ; but, as I was certain that I
had something to say, and quite indifferent
about the manner, words came without dif-
ficulty. Amazement appeared in every
face, when I declared myself to be the son
of the poor woman, whom we had just in-
terred. And when I pointed to the real
Earl of Glenthorn, and when I declared,
that I relinquished to him his hereditary
title and lawful property, my auditors looked
alternately at me and at my foster-brother,
seeming to think it impossible, that a man,
with face and hands so black as Christy’s
usually were known to be, could become
an earl.

When I concluded my narrative, and
paused, the silence still continued, all seemed
held in mute astonishment.

e< And now, my good friends,” continued
I, <c let me bid you farewell; probably you
will never see or hear of me more ; but
whether he be rich or poor, or high or low-
born, every honest man must wish to leave

behind him a fair character. Therefore,
when I am gone, and, as it were, dead to
you, speak of me, not as of an impostor,
who long assumed a name, and enjoyed a
fortune that wTas not his own ; but remem-
ber, that I wras bred to believe myself heir
to a great estate, and that, after having
lived till the age of eight and twenty, in
every kind of luxury, I voluntarily gave up
the fortune I enjoyed, the moment I dis-
covered that it w-as not justly mine.”

“ That you did, indeed,” interrupted
Christy ; “ and of that I am ready to bear
witness for you in this world and in the
next. God bless and prosper you wherever
you go ! and sure enough he will, for be
cannot do other than prosper one that de-
serves it so well. I never should have
known a sentence of the secret,” continued
he, addressing his neighbours, “ if it had
not been for his generosity to tell it me ;
and even had I found it out by any mar acte *
w'here would have been the gain of that to
me, for you know he could, had he been
so inclined, have kept me out of all by the
law—ay, baffled me on till my heart was

sick, and till my little substance was wasted,

and my bones rotten in the ground; but,

God’s blessingbe upon him ! he’s an honest

man, and done that which many a lord in

his place would not have done ; but a good

conscience is a kingdom in itself, and that

he cannot but have, wherever he goes—

and all which grieves me is that he is going

away from us. If he’d be prevailed with

by me, he’d stay where is, and we’d share

and share alike ; but he’s too proud for that

î—and no wonder—he has a right to be

proud ; for no matter who was his mother,

he’ll live and die a gentleman, every inch

of him. Any man, you see, may be made

a lord ; but a gentleman a man must make

himself. And yourselves can witness, has
%/ *

not he reigned over ns like a gentleman, and
a raal gentleman ; and shown mercy to the
poor, and done justice to all, as well as to
me ; and did not he take me by the hand
when I was persecuted, and none else in the
wide world to befrind me ; and did not he
stand up for me against the tyrants that had
the sway then ; ay, and did not he put him-
self to trouble, day and night, go riding here

and there, and spairing and writing for me ?
Well, as they say, he loves his ease, and
that’s the worst can be said of him ; he took:
all this pains for a poor man, and had
like to have lost his life by it. And now,
wherever he is and whatever, can I help,
loving and praying for him ? or could you ?
And since you will go,” added he, turning
to me with tears in his eyes, “ take with
you the blessings, of the poor, which, they
say, carry a man straight to Heaven, if any
thing can.”

The surrounding crowd joined with one
voice in applauding this speech : “ It is he
that has said what we all think,” cried
they, following me with acclamations to the
castle. When they saw the chaise at the
door, which was to carry me away, their
acclamations suddenly ceased—ff But is he
going?—But can’t he stay?—And is he
going this minute ? troth it’s a pity, and a
great pity !”

Again and again these honest people in-
sisted upon taking leave of me, and I could
not force myself away without difficulty.
They walked on beside my carriage, Christy

at their head ; and in this spec its of tri-
umph, melancholy indeed, but-grateful to
my heart, I quitted Glenthorn Castle, passed
through that demesne which was no longer
mine, and at the verge of the county shook
hands, for the last time, with these affec-
tionate and generous people. I then bid
my postillion drive on fast; and I never
looked back, never once cast a lingering
look at all I left behind. I felt proud of
having executed my purpose, and con-
scious I had not the weak, wavering, inef-
ficient character, that had formerly dis-
graced me. As to the future I had not dis-
tinctly arranged my plans, nor was my
mind during the remainder of the day suf-
ficiently tranquil for reflection. I felt like
one in a dream, and could scarcely per-
suade myself of the reality of the events,
that had succeeded each other with such
astonishing rapidity. At night I stopped
at an inn where I was not known, and hav-
ing no attendants or equipage to command
respect from hostlers, waiters, and inn-
keepers, I was made immediately sensible
of the reality, at least, of the change in my

fortune ; but I was not mortified—I felt
only as if I were travelling incognito. And
I contrived to go to bed without a valet-de-
chambre, and slept soundly, for I had
earned a sound sleep by exertion both of
body and mind.

CHAPTER XIX.

In the morning I awoke with a confused
notion* that something extraordinary had
happened ; but it was a good while before
I recollected myself sufficiently* to be per-
fectly sensible of the absolute and irrevo-
cable change in my circumstances. An inn
may not appear the best possible place for
meditation, especially if the moraliseras
bed-chamber be next the yard where car-
riages roll, and hostlers swear perpetually ;
yet* so situate* I* this morning as I lay
awake in my bed, thought so abstractedly
and attentively* that I heard neither wheels
nor hostlers. I reviewed the whole-of my

y

past life; I regretted bitterly my extrava-
gance, my dissipation* my waste of time *
I considered how small a share of enjoy-
ment my wealth had iwocured, either for
myself or others; how little advantage I
had derived from my education, and from
all my opportunities of acquiring know-

ledge. It had been in my power to asso-
ciate with persons of the highest talents,
and of the best information in the British
dominions; yet I had devoted my youth to
loungers, and gamesters, and epicures, and
knew that scarcely a trace of my existence
remained in the minds of those selfish be-
ings, who once called themselves my friends.
I wished, that I could live my life over
again, and I felt that, were it in my power,
should live in a manner very different from
that in which I had fooled away existence.
In the midst of my self-reproaches, how-
ever, I had some consolation in the idea,
that I had never been guilty of any base or
dishonourable action. I recollected, with
satisfaction, my behaviour to Lady Glen-
thorn, when I discovered her misconduct ;
I recollected that I had always shown gra-
titude to poor Ellinor for her kindness; I
recollected with pleasure, that when trusted
with power I had not used it tyrannically.
My exertions in favour of my foster-bro-
ther, when he was oppressed, I remem-
bered with much satisfaction; and the
steadiness with which I behaved, when a
conspiracy was formed against my life, gave



me confidence in my own courage ; and,
after having sacrificed my vast possessions
to a sense of justice, no mortal could doubt
my integrity ; so that upon the whole, not-
withstanding my past follies, I had a to-
lerably good opinion of myself, or rather
good hopes for the future. I was certain,
that there was more in me than the world
had seen ; and I was ambitious of proving,
that I had some personal merit independent
of the adventitious circumstances of rank
and fortune. But how was I to distinguish
myself?

Just as I came to this difficult question,
the chambermaid interrupted my reverie;
by warning me in a shrill voice, that it was
very late, and that she had called me above
two hours before.

Where’s my man ? send up my man ? O !
I beg your pardon—nothing at all; only,
my good girl, I should be obliged to’you if
you could let me have a little warm water,
that I may shave myself.

It was new and rather strange to me to
be without attendants, but I found, that
when I was forced to it, I could do things
admirably well for myself, that I had never

suspected I could perform without assist-
ance. After I had travelled two days with-
out servants, how I had travelled with them
was the wonder. I once caught myself,
saying of myself, “ that careless blockhead
has forgot my night-cap.” For some time
I was liable to make odd blunders about my
own identity ; I was apt to mistake between
my old and my new habits, so that when I
spoke in the tone and imperative mood in
which Lord Glenthorn had been habituated
to speak, people stared at me as if I was
mad, and I in my turn was frequently asto-
nished by their astonishment, and perplexed
by their ease of behaviour in my presence.

, Upon my arrival in Dublin, I went to a
small lodging which Mr. M‘Leod had re-
commended to me ; it was such as suited
my reduced finances; but, at first \\e\v, it
was not much to my taste; however, I eat
with a good appetite my very frugal sup-
per, upon a little table, covered with a little
table-cloth, on w hich I could not wTipe my
mouth without stooping low : the mistress
of the house, a north-country w oman, w as
so condescending, as to blow my fire, re-
marking at the same time, that coals were

a very scarce article ; she begged to know
whether I would choose a fire in my bed-
room, and what quantity of coals she should
lay in; she added many questions about
boarding, and small-beer, and tea,andsugar,
and butter, and blankets, and sheets, and
washerwomen, which almost overwhelmed
my spirits.

And must I think of all these things for
myself? said I, in a lamentable tone, and
I suppose with a most deplorable length of
face, for the woman could not refrain from
laughing; as she left the room, I heard her
exclaim, “ Lord help him ! he looks as
much astray as if he was just new from
the Isle of Sky.”

The cares of life were coming fast upon
me, and I was terrified by the idea of a
host of petty evils; I sat ruminating with
my feet on the bars of the grate, till past
midnight, till my landlady, who seemed to
think it incumbent upon her to supply me
with common sense, came to inform me
that there was a good fire burning to waste
in the bed-room, and that I should find my-
self a deal better there than sitting over the
cinders. I suffered myself to be removed to

the bed-chamber, and again established my
feet upon the upper bar of the grate.

“ Lack! sir, you’ll burn your boots,”
said my careful landlady, who, after bidding
me good-night, put her head back into the
room, tô beg I would be sure to rake the
fire, and throw up the ashes safe before I
went to bed. Left to my own meditations,
I confess I did feel rather forlorn. I reflect-
ed upon my helplessness in all the common
business of life; and the more I considered,
that I was totally unfit for any employment
or profession, by which I could either earn
money, or distinguish myself, the deeper
became my despondency. I passed a sleep-
less night, vainly regretting the time that
never could be recalled.

In the morning, my landlady gave me
some letters, which had been forwarded for
me from Glenthorn Castle : The direction,
to the Earl of Glçnthorn, scratched out,
and in its place inserted my new address,
<f C. (J Donoghoe, Esq., No. 6, Duke-Street,
Dublin.” I remember, I held the letters in
my hand, contemplating the direction for
some minutes, and at length read it aloud
repeatedly, to my landlady’s infinite amuse-

ment: she knew nothing of my history,
and seemed in doubt whether to think me
extremely silly or mad. One of my letters
was from Lord Y****, an Irish nobleman,
with whom I was not personally acquainted,
but for whose amiable character, and lite-
rary reputation, I had always, even during
my days of dissipation, peculiar respect.
He wrote to me, to make inquiries respect-
ing the character of a Mr. Lyddell, who
had just proposed himself as tutor to the son
of one of his friends. Mr. Lyddell had for-
merly been my favourite tutor, the man who
had encouraged me in every species of igno-
rance and idleness. In my present state of
mind, I was not disposed to speak favourably
of this gentleman; and I resolved, that I
would not be instrumental in placing ano-
ther young nobleman under his guidance.
I wrote an explicit, indignant, and I will
say eloquent letter, upon this occasion;
but, when I came to the signature, I felt a
repugnance to signing myself, C. O’Dono-
ghoe, and I recollected, that as my history
could not yet be public, Lord Y**** would
bepuzzled by this strange name, and would
be unable to comprehend this answer to his

letter. I therefore determined to wait upon
his lordship, and to make my explanations
in person; besides my other reasons for de-
termining on this visit, I had a strong desire
to become personally acquainted with a
nobleman, of whom I had heard so much.
Ilis lordship’s porter was not quite so in-
solent as some of his brethren, and though
I did not come in a showy equipage, and
though I had no laced footmen to enforce
my rights, I gained admission. I passed
through a gallery of fine statues, to a mag-
nificent library, which I admired till the
master of the house appeared, and from
that moment he commanded, or rather cap-
tivated, my attention.

Lord Y**** was at this time an elderly
gentleman. In his address, there was a
becoming mixture of ease and dignity ^ lie
was not what the French call maniéré; his
politeness was not of any particular school,
but founded on those general principles of
good taste, good sense, and good nature,
which must succeed in all times, places,
ond seasons. I lis desire to please evidently
arose, not from vanity, but benevolence.
In his conversation, there was neither the

pedantry of a recluse, nor the coxcombry
of a man of the world : his knowledge was
select, his wit without effort, the play of a
cultivated imagination: the happiness of
his expressions did not seem the result of
care; and his allusions were at once so ap-
posite and elegant, as to charm both the
learned and the unlearned ; all he said was
sufficiently clear and just, to strike every
person of plain sense and natural feeling,
whilst, to the man of literature, it had often
a further power to please, by its less obvious
meaning. Lord Y****’s superiority never
depressed those with whom he conversed ;
on the contrary, they felt themselves raised
by the magic of politeness to his level ; in-
stead of being compelled to pay tribute,
they seemed invited to share his intellectual
dominion, and to enjoy with him the de-
lightful pre-eminence of genius and virtue.

I shall be forgiven for pausing in my own
insignificant story, to dwell on the noble
character of a departed friend. That he
permitted me to call hirn my friend, I think
the greatest honour of my life. But let me,
if I can, go on regularly with my narrative.

Lord	took	it for granted, during

our first half hour’s conversation, that*he
was speaking to the Earl of Glen thorn ; he
thanked me with much warmth for putting
him on his guard against the character of
Mr. Lyddell ; and his lordship was also
pleased to thank me, for making him ac-
quainted, as he said, with my own charac-
ter; for convincing him how ill it had been
appreciated by those, who imagined, that
wealth and title were the only distinctions,
which the Earl of Glenthorn might claim.
This compliment went nearer to my heart
than Lord Y**** could guess.

“ My character,” said I, “ since your
lordship encourages me to speak of myself
with freedom, my character has, I hope,
been much changed and improved by cir-
cumstances ; and perhaps those, which
might at present be deemed the most unfor-
tunate, may ultimately prove of the greatest
advantage by urging me to exertion.—Your
lordship is not aware of what I allude to :
a late event in my singular history,” con-
tinued I, taking up the newspapers which
lay on his library table—“ my singular

history, has not yet, I fancy, got into the
public newspapers. Perhaps you will hear
it most favourably from myself.”

Lord Y**** was politely, benevolently
attentive, whilst I related to him the sudden
and singular change in my fortune: when
I gave an account of the manner in which
I had conducted myself after the discovery
of my birth, tears of generous feeling filled
his eyes ; he laid his hand upon mine when
I paused.

<c Whatever you have lost,” said he,
f‘ you have gained a friend. Do not be sur-
prised,” continued he, “ by this sudden
declaration. Before I saw you this morn-
ing, your real character was better known
to me than you imagine. I learnt it from
a particular friend of mine, of whosejudge-
ment and abilities I have the highest opi-
nion, Mr. Cecil Devereux ; I saw him just
after his marriage, and the very evening
before they sailed, I remember, when Lady
Geraldine and he were talking of the re-
gret they felt in leaving Ireland, among the
friends whom they lamented that they should
not see again, perhaps for years, you were
mentioned with peculiar esteem and affec-

tion. They called you their generous bene-
factor, and fully explained to me the claim
you had to this title—a title which never
can be lost. But Mr. Devereux was anxi-
ous to convince me, that he was not in-
fluenced by the partiality of gratitude in
his opinion of his benefactor’s talents. He
repeated an assertion, that was supported
with much energy by the charming Lady
Geraldine, that Lord Glenthorn had abilities
to be any thing he pleased; and the high
terms in which they spoke of his talents,
and the strong proofs they adduced of the
generosity of his character, excited, in my
mind, a warm desire to cultivate his ac-
quaintance ; a desire, which has been con-
siderably increased within this last hour.
May I hope, that the Irish rapidity, with
which I have passed from acquaintance to
friendship, may not shock English habits
of reserve, and may not induce you to doubt
the sincerity of the man, who has ventured
with so little hesitation or ceremony, to de-
clare himself your friend ?”

I was so much moved by this unexpected
kindness, that, though I felt how much
more was requisite, I could answer only

with a bow ; and I was glad to make my
retreat as soon as possible. The very next
day, his lordship returned my visit, to my
landlady’s irrecoverable astonishment ; and
I had increasing reason to regard him with
admiration and affection. He convinced
me, that I had interested him in my con-
cerns, and told me, I must forgive him if he
spoke to me with the freedom of a friend ;
thus I was encouraged to consult him re-
specting my future plans. Plans, indeed,
I had none regularly formed; but Lord
by his judicious suggestions, settled,
and directed my ideas, without overpower-
ing me by the formality of advice. My
ambition was excited to deserve his friend-
ship, and to accomplish his predictions.
The profession of the law was that, to
which he advised me to turn my thoughts :
he predicted, that, if for five years I would
persevere in application to the necessary
preparatory studies, I should afterwards dis-
tinguish myself at the bar, more than I had
ever been distinguished by the title of Earl
of Glenthorn. Five years of hard labour!
the idea alarmed, but did not utterly appal
my imagination ; and to prevent my dwell-

ing upon it too long at the first. Lord Y****
suddenly changed the conversation, and in
a playful tone, said, Cf Before you immerse
3rourself in your studies, I must, however,
claim some of your time. You must permit
me to carry you home with me to day, to
introduce you to two ladies of my acquaint-
ance. The one prudent and old—if a lady
can .ever be old ; the other, young, and
beautiful, and graceful, and witty, and wise,
and reasonable. One of these ladies is
much prepossessed in your favour, the other
strongly prejudiced against you—-for the
best of all possible reasons, because she does
not know you.”

I accepted Lord Y****’s invitation -3 not
a little curious, to know, whether it was the
old and prudent, or the young, beautiful,
graceful,witty,wise, and reasonablelady,who
was much prepossessed in my favour. Not-
withstanding my usual indifference to the
whole race of very agreeable young ladies%
I remember trying to form a picture in my
imagination of this all-accomplished female.

CHAPTER XX.

Upon my arrival at Y**** House, I found
two ladies in the drawing-room, in earnest
conversation with Lady Y****. In their
external appearance, they were nearly what
my friend had described ; except that the
beauty of the youngest infinitely surpassed
my expectations. The elegance of her
form, and the charming expression of her
countenance, struck me with a sort of de-
lightful surprise, that was quickly succeeded
by a most painful sensation.

“ Lady Y****, give me leave to intro-
duce to you Mr. O’Donoghoe.”

Shocked by the sound of my own name,
I was ready to recoil abashed. The elderly
lady turned her eyes upon me for an instant,
with that indifference with which we look
at an uninteresting stranger. The young
lady seemed to pity my confusion ; for
though so well and so long used to varieties
of the highest company, when placed in a

situation that was new to me, I was unac-
countably disconcerted. Ah ! thought I,
how differently should I be received were
I still Earl of Glen thorn !

I was rather angry with Lord Y**** for
not introducing me, as he had promised, to
this fair lady ; and yet the repetition of my
name would have increased my vexation.
In short, I was unjust, and felt an impa-
tience and irritability quite unusual to my
temper. Lady Y**** addressed some con-
versation to me, in an obliging manner, and
I did my best to support my part till she
left me : but my attention was soon dis-
tracted, by a conversation that commenced
at another part of the room, between the
elderly lady and Lady Y****.

“ My dear Lady Y****, have you heard

the extraordinary news ? the most incredible

thing that ever was heard I For my part, I

cannot believe it yet, though we have the

intelligence from the best authority. Lord

*/

Glenthorn, that is to say, the person we
always called Lord Glenthorn, turns out to
be the sou of the lord knows who—they
don’t mention the name.”

At this speech i was ready to sink into

the earth. Lord Y**** took my arm, and
led me into another room. cc I have some
cameos,” said he, cf which are thought
curious ; would you like to look at them?’*
fC Can you conceive it!” continued the
elderly lady, whose voice I still heard, as
the folding doors of the room were open:
“ Changed at nurse ! One hears of such
tilings in novels, but, in real life, I abso-
lutely cannot believe it. Yet here, in this
letter from Lady Ormsby, are all the parti-
culars : and a blacksmith is found to be
Earl of Glenthorn, and takes possession of
Glen thorn Castle, and all the estates. And
the man is married, to some vulgarian, of
course : and he has a son, and may have
half a hundred, you know; so there is an
end of our hopes ; and there is an end too
of all my fine schemes for Cecilia.”

I felt myself change colour again. “ I
believe,” said I, to LordY"****, “ I ought
not to hear this. If your lordship will give
me leave, I will shut the door.”

u No, no,” said he, smiling, and stop-
ping me, “ you ought to hear it, for it will
do you a great deal of good. You know I
have undertaken to be your guide, philoso*

plîer, and friend; so you must let me have
my own way ; and if it should so happen,
hear yourself abused patiently. Is not this
a fine bust of Socrates?”

Some part of the conversation in the next
room I missed, whilst his lordship spoke.—
The next words I heard were—

“But, my dear LadyY****, look at
Cecilia. Would not any other girl be cast
down and miserable in Cecilia’s place ? yet
see how provokingly happy and well she
looks.”

“ Yes,” replied Lady Y****, “ I never
saw her appear better : but we are not to
judge of her by what any other young lady
would be in her place, for I know of none
at all comparable to Miss Delamere.”

“ MissDelamere!” said I, to Lord Y * #

*€ Is this the Miss Delamere who is heir
at law to—”

“ The Glenthorn estate. Yes—do not
let the head of Socrates fall from your
hands,” said his lordship, smiling.

I again lost something that was said in
the next room ; but I heard the old lady
going on with—■

“ I only say, my dear, that if the man

had been really what he was said to be, you
could not have done better.”

“ Dearest mother, you cannot be serious,”
replied the sweetest voice I ever heard. “ I
am sure that you never were in earnest upon
this subject : you could not wish me to be
united with such a man as Lord Glenthorn
was said to be.”

cc Why ? what was he said to be, my
dear?—a little dissipated, a little extravagant
only : and if he had a fortune to support
it, child, what matter?” pursued the mo-
ther : “ all young men are extravagant
now-a days—you must take the world as it
goes.”

<£ The lady who married Lord Glenthorn,
I suppose, acted upon that principle, and
you see what was the consequence.”

“ O, my dear, as to her ladyship, it ran
in the blood : let her have married whom
she would, she would have done the same*:
and I am told Lord Glenthorn made an in-
comparably good husband. A cousin of
Lady Glenthorn’s assured me, that she was
present one day, when her ladyship ex-
pressed a wish for a guld chain to wear
round her neck, or braid her hair, I forget

for.what, but that very hour Lord Glen-
thorn bespoke for her a hundred yards of
gold chain, at three guineas a yard. An-
other time she longed for an Indian shawl,
and his lordship presented her next day with
three dozen real India shawls. There’s a
husband for you, Cecilia I”

c< Not for me, mamma,” said Cecilia,
laughing.

“ Ah, you are a strange, romantic girl,
and never will be married after all, I fear.”

“ Never to a fool, I hope,” said Cecilia.

“ Miss Delamere will, however, allow,”
said Lady Y****, “ that a man may have
his follies, without being a fool, or wholly
unworthy of her esteem ; otherwise, what
a large portion of mankind she would de-
prive of hope !”

“ As to Lord Glen thorn, he was no fool,
I promise you,” continued the mother;
“ has not he been living prudently enough
these three years ? we have not heard of
late of any of his extraordinary landaus.”

“ But I have been told,” said Cecilia,
“ that he is quite uninformed, without any
taste for literature, and absolutely incapable
of exertion—a victim to ennui. I low miser-

able a woman must be with such a hus-
band !”	,

“ But,”-said Lady Y****, “ what could
be expected from a young nobleman, bred
up as Lord Glenthorn was,?”

“ Nothing,” said Cecilia; “ and that is
the very reason I never,wish to secUiinm” '
“.Perhaps Miss Delamere’s opinion might
be changed if .she had known him,” said
LadyY****. ;

“ Ay, for he is a very handsome man, I
have heard,” said the mother. “ Lady
Jocunda Lawler told me so, in one < of her
letters ; and Lady Jocunda was * very near
being married to him herself, I can tell you,
for he admired her prodigiously.”

“ A certain proof, that he never would
have admired me,” said Cecilia ; cc for. two
women, so opposite in every respect, no
man could have loved.”

“ Lord bless you, child !. how little you
know of the matter ! After all, I dare say,
if you had been acquainted with him, you
might have been in love yourself with Lord
Glenthorn.”

“ Possibly,” said Cecilia, <c if I had found
him the reverse of what he is reported to be.”

Company came in at this instant. Lord
Y#*** was called to receive them, and I
followed; glad, at this instant, that I was
not Lord Glenthorn. At dinner the con-
versation turned upon general subjects : and
Lord	with	polite	and	friendly at-

tention, drew me out, without seeming to do
so, in the most friendly manner possible.

I had the pleasure to perceive, that Ceci-
lia Delamere did not find me a fool. I
never, even in the presence of Lady Geral-
dine, exerted myself so much to avoid this
disgrace.

After all the company, except Mrs. and
Miss Delamere, were gone. Lord Y****
called me aside.

“ Will you pardon.” said he, “ the means
I have taken to convince you how much
superior you are to the opinion that has
been commonly formed of Lord Glenthorn?
Will you forgive me for convincing you,
that when a man has sufficient strength of
mind to rely upon himself, and sufficient
energy to exert his abilities, he becomes in-
dependent of common report and vulgar
opinion ? he secures the suffrages of the best
iudges ; and they, in time, lead all the rest

of the world. Will you permit me now to
introduce you to your prudent friend and
your fair enemy ? Mrs. Delamere—Miss
Delamere, give me leave to introduce to you
the late Earl of Glenthorn.”

Of the astonishment in the opening eyes
of Mrs. Delamere I have some faint recol-
lection. I can never forget the crimson
blush, that instantaneously spread over the'
celestial countenance of Cecilia. She was
perfectly silent, but her mother went on
talking with increased rapidity.

“ Good Heavens ! the late Lord Glen-
thorn ! Why, I was talking—but he was
not in the room.” The ladies exchanged
looks, which seemed to say, “ I hope he
did not hear all we said of him.”

“ My dear Lord	why	did not you

tell us this before? Suppose we had spoken
of his lordship, you would have been an-
swerable for all the consequences.”

“ Certainly,” said Lord
“ But, seriously,” said the old lady, “ have
I the pleasure to speak to Lord Glenthorn,
or have I not? I believe I began, unluckily,
to talk of a strange^tory I had heard; hut
perhaps all this is a mistake, and my coun-



try correspondent may have been amusing
herself at the’expense of my credulity. I
assure you I was not imposed upon, I never
believed half the story.”

ce You may believe the whole of it, ma-
dam,” said I ; “ the story is perfectly true.”
“ O ! my good sir, how sorry I am to
hear you say it is all true ! And the black-
smith is really Earl of Glenthorn, and has
taken possession of the castle, and is mar-
ried, and has a son! Lord bless me, how
unfortunate! Well, I can only say, sir, I
wish, with all my heart, you were Earl of
Glenthorn still.”

After hearing from Lord Y**** the cir-
cumstances of what he was pleased to call
my generous conduct, Mrs. Delamere ob-
served, that I had acted very generously, to
bb sure, but that few in my place would
have thought themselves bound to give up
possession of an estate, which I had so long
been taught to believe was my own. To
have and to hold, she observed, always
went together in law ; and she could not
help thinking I had done very injudiciously
and imprudently not to let the law decide
for me.	-	J	*

I was consoled for Mrs. Delamere’s re-
prehensions by her daughter’s approving
countenance. After this visit, Lord Y ***;*.
gave me a general invitation to his house,
where I frequently saw Miss Delamere, and
frequently compared her with my recollec-
tion of Lady Geraldine **********
Cecilia Delamere was not so entertaining,
but she was more interesting than Lady
Geraldine ; the flashes of her ladyship’s wit,
though always striking, were sometimes
dangerous; Cecilia’s wit, though equally
brilliant, shone with a more pleasing and
inoffensive light. Cecilia had humour, but
it played rather upon things than üpon per-
sons : she had not the dexterity of Lady
Geraldine in drawing caricature, but in fa-
vourable likenesses she. excelled; she had
neither the powers of mimickry, nor the sa-
tirical talents of Lady Geraldine; but Ce-
cilia’s general observations on life and man-
ners showed more impartiality and juster
discrimination, if not so wide a range of
thought. With as much generosity as Lady
Geraldine could show in great affairs, she
had more forbearance and delicacy of at-
tention on every-day occasions. Lady Ge*

raldine had much pride, and it often gave
offence : Cecilia, perhaps, had more pride,
but it never appeared, except upon the
defensive : without having less candour,
she had less occasion for it than Lady Ge-
raldine seemed to have; and Cecilia’s tem-
per had more softness and equability. Per-
haps Cecilia was not so fascinating, but she
was more attractive. One had the envied
art of appearing to advantage in public—
the other, the more desirable power of be-
ing happy in private. I admired Lady Ge-
raldine long before I loved her; I loved Ce-
cilia long before I admired her.

Whilst I possibly could, I called what I
felt for Miss Delamere only esteem ; but
w hen I found it impossible to conceal from
myself that I loved, I resolved to avoid this
charming woman. How happy, thought I,
would the fortune I once possessed now
make me ! but in my present circumstances
w hat have I to hope ? Surely my friend Lord
y**** ]las not shown his usual prudence,
in exposing me to such a temptation; but
it is to be supposed, he thinks, that the im-
possibility of my obtaining Miss Delamere
W'ould prevent my thinking of her; or, per-

haps, he depends on the inertness and apathy
of my temper. Unfortunately for me, my
sensibility has increased since I have be-
come poor; for many years, when I was
rich, and could have married easily, I never
wished to marry, and now that I have not
enough to support a wife, I immediately
fall desperately in love.

Again and again I pondered upon my
circumstances; three hundred a-year was
the amount of all my w orldly possessions ;
and Miss Delamere w as not rich, and she
had been bred expensively ; for it had never
been absent from her mother’s mind, that
Cecilia would be heiress to the immense
Glenthorn estate. The present possessor
was, however, an excellent life, and he had
a son stout and healthy, so all these hopes
of Mrs. Delamere’s were at an end ; and as
there was little chance,, as she said (laugh-
ing), of persuading her daughter to marry
Johnny, the young lord and heir apparent,
it was no,w necessary to turn her views else-
where, and to form for Cecilia some suit-
able alliance^. Rank and large fortune were,
in Mrs. Delamere’s opinion,, indispensable
to happiness. Cecilia’s ideas were far more

moderate; but though perfectly disinter-
ested and generous, she was not so roman-
tic, or.so silly, as to think of marrying any
man, without the probability of his being
able to support her in the society of her
equals ; nor, even if I could have thought
it possible to prevail upon Miss Delamere
to make an unbecoming and imprudent
choice, would I have taken advantage of
the confidence reposed in me by Lord
Y****, to destroy the happiness of a young
friend, for whom he evidently had a great
regard. I resolved to see her no more—
and for some weeks I kept rny resolution ;
I refrained from going to Y* * ** house. I
deem this the most virtuous action of my
life ; it certainly was the most painful sacri-
fice I ever made to a sense of duty. At
last. Lord Y * * * * came to me one morn-
ing, and after reproaching me, in a friendly
manner, for having so long absented myself
from his house, declared, that he would not
be satisfied with any of those common ex-
cuses, which might content a mere ac-
quaintance; that his sincere anxiety for my
welfare gave him a right to expect from me
the frankness of a friend. It was a relief to

my mind to be encouraged in this manner.
I confessed with entire openness my real
motive. Lord Y * * * * heard me without
surprise :—

“ It is gratifying to me,” said his lord-
ship, “ to be convinced, that I was not mis-
taken in my judgement, either of your taste,
or your integrity ; permit me to assure you,
that I foresaw exactly how you would feel,
and precisely how you would act. There
are certain moral omens, which old expe-
rience never fails to interpret rightly, and
from which, unerring predictions of the fu-
ture conduct, and consequently of the fu-
ture fate of individuals, may be formed. I
hold that we are the artificers of our own
fortune. If there be any whom the gods
wish to destroy, these are first deprived of
understanding ; whom the gods wish to fa-
vour, they first endow with integrity, inspire
with understanding, and animate with ac-
tivity. Have I not seen integrity in you ?
and shall I not see activity ? Yes—that su-
pineness of temper or habit, with which
you reproach yourself, has arisen, believe
me, only from want of motive ; but you have
now the most powerful of motives, and, in

proportion to your exertions, will be your
success. In our country, you know, the
highest offices of the state are open to ta-
lents and perseverance -y a man of abilities
and application cannot fail to secure inde-
pendence, and obtain distinction. Time and
industry are necessary to prepare you for
the profession, to which you will hereafter
be an honour, and you will courageous^
submit.

‘ Time and industry the mighty two,

' Which bring our wishes nearer to our view/

As to the probability that your present
wishes may be crowned with success, I can
judge only from my general knowledge of
the views and disposition of the lady whom
you admire. I know that her views with
respect to fortune are moderate, and that
her disposition and excellent understanding
will, in the choice of a husband, direct her
preference to the essential good qualities,
and not to the accidental advantages of the
candidates for lier favour. As to the mo-
ther’s influence, that will necessarily yield
to the daughter’s superior judgement. Ce-
cilia possesses over her mother not only that

power, which strong minds always have
over weak ones, but she further exercises
the witchcraft of gentle manners, which in
the female sex is always irresistible, even
over violent tempers. Prudential consider-
ations have a just, though not exclusive
claim to Miss Delamere’s attention. But
Miss Delamere's relations, I fancy, could
find means of providing against any pecu-
niary embarrassments, if she should think
proper to unite herself to a man who can
be content, as she would be, with a com-
petence, and who should have proved him-
self able, by his own exertions, to maintain
his wife in independence. On this last con-
dition I must dwell with emphasis, because
it is indispensable, and I am convinced,
that, without it. Miss Delamere’s consent,
even after she is of age, and at liberty to
judge for herself, could never be obtained.
You perceive then, how much depends upon
your own exertions ; and this is the best
hope, and the best motive that I can give
to a strong and generous mind. Farewell
—Persevere and prosper.”

Such was the general purport of what
Lord Y* * * * said to me ; indeed, I believe.

that I hâve repeated his very words, for
they made a great and ineffaceable impres-
sion upon my mind. From this day I date
the commencement of a new existence.
Fired with ambition, I hope generous am-
bition, to distinguish myself among men,
and to win the favour of the most amiable
and the most lovely of women ; all the fa-
culties of my soul were awakened—I be-
came active, permanently active. The en-
chantment of indolence was dissolved, and
the demon of ennui was cast out for ever.

CHAPTER XXI.

If, among those who may be tempted to
peruse my history, there should be any mere
novel-readers, let me advise them to throw
the book aside at the commencement of this
chapter, for I have no more wonderful inci-
dents to relate, no more changes at nurse,
no more sudden turns of fortune. I am now
become a plodding man of business, poring
over law-books from morning till night, and
leading a most monotonous life ; yet occu-
pation, and hope, and the constant sense of
approaching nearer to my object, rendered
this mode of existence, dull as it may seem,
infinitely more agreeable than many of my
apparently prosperous days, when I had
more money, and more time, than I knew
how to enjoy. I resolutely persevered in
my studies.

About a month after I came to town, the
doors of my lodgings were blockaded by
half a dozen cars, loaded with huge pack-

ing-cases, on which I saw, in the hand-
writing which I remembered often to have
seen in my blacksmith’s bills, a direction to
Christopher O'Doiwghoey Esquire—this side
upwards, to be kept dry.

One of the carmen fumbled in what he
called his pocket, and at last produced a
very dirty note.

“ My dear and honourable foster-brother,
laming from Mr. M‘Leod, that you are
thinking of sludde-iug, I send you inclosed
by the bearer, who is to get nothing for the
corrige, all the bookes from the big booke-
room at the castle, which I hope, being of
not as much use as I could wish to me,
your honour will not scorn to accept,, with
the true veneration of

“ Your ever-loving foster-brother,

“ and grateful humble servant,

“ to command.

“ P. S. No name needful, for you will
not be astray about the hand.”

This good-natured fellow's present was
highly valuable and useful to me.

Among my pleasures at this studious pe-

riod of my life, when I had few events to
break the uniform tenour of my days, I must
mention letters which I frequently received
from Mr. Devereux and Lady Geraldine,
who still continued in India. Mr. Deve-
reux was acquainted with almost all the
men of eminence at the Irish bar; men who
are not mere lawyers, but persons of li-
terature, of agreeable manners, and gentle-
manlike habits. Air. Devereux wrote to his
friends so warmly in my favour, that, in-
stead of finding myself a stranger in Dublin,
my only difficulty was how to avoid the nu-
merous invitations, which tempted me from
my studies.

Those gentlemen of the bar, who were
intimate with Mr. Devereux, honoured me
with particular attention, and their society
was peculiarly useful, as well as agreeable
to me: they directed my industry to the
best and shortest means of preparing my-
selffortheir profession; they put into my
hands the best books ; told me all that ex-
perience had taught them of the art of dis-
tinguishing, in the mass of law precedents,
the useful from the useless, instructed me
in the methods of indexing and common-

placing, and gave me all those advantages,
which solitary students so often want, and
the want of which so often makes the study
of the law appear an endless maze without
a plan. When I found myself surrounded
with books, and reading assiduously day
and night, I could scarcely believe in my
own identity; I could scarcely imagine,
that I was the same person, who, but a few
months before this time, lolled upon a sofa
half the day, and found it an intolerable
labour to read or think for half an hour to-
gether. Such is the power of motive !
During the whole time I pursued my stu-
dies, and kept my terms in Ireland, the
only relaxation I allowed myself was in the
society at Lord Y****’s house in Dublin,
and, during my vacations, in excursions
which I made with his lordship to different
parts of the country. Lord Y * * * * had
two country seats in the most beautiful parts
of Ireland, one in the county of Wicklow,
and one in the Queen’s County. How dif-
ferently the face of nature appeared to me
now I with what different sensations I be-
held the same objects !

f No brighter colours paint th’ enamell’d fields,

‘ No sweeter fragrance now the garden yields ;

*	Whence th is strange increase of joy ?

*	Is it to love these new delights I owe?’

It was not to love that I owed these new
delights, for Cecilia was not there; but my
powers of observation were wakened, and
the confinement and labour to which I had
lately Submitted gave value to the pleasures
of rest and liberty, and to the freshness of
country air, and the beautiful scenes of
nature. So true it is, that all our plea-
sures must be earned, before they can be
enjoyed. When I saw on Lord Y****’s
estates, and on those of several other gen-
tlemen, which he occasionally took me to
visit, the neat cottages, the well-cultivated
farms, the air of comfort, industry, and
prosperity, diffused through the lower clas-
ses of the people, I was convinced, that
much may be done by the judicious care
and assistance of landlords for their tenantry.
I saw this with mixed sensations of pleasure
and of pain—of pain, for I reflected how
little I had accomplished, and how ill I had
done even that little, whilst the means of
doing good to numbers had been in my

power. For the very trifling services I did
some of my poor tenants, I am sure I had
abundant gratitude, and I was astonished
and touched by instances of this gratitude
shown to me after I had lost my fortune,
and when I scarcely had myself any re-
membrance of the people who came to thank
me. Trivial as it is, I cannot forbear to
record one of the many instances of grati-
tude I met with from a poor Irishman.

Whilst I was in Dublin, as I was paying
a morning visit to Lord Y****, sitting with
him in his library, we heard some disturb-
ance in the inner court, and looking out of
the window, we saw a countryman with a
basket on his arm, struggling with the por-
ter and two footmen.

“ He is here, I know to a certainty lie is
here, and I shall see him, say what you.
plase now !”

“ I tell you my lord is not at home,” said
the porter.

“ What’s the matter,” said Lord Y * * **>
opening the window.

“ See, there’s my lord himself at the
window; are not you ashamed of yourself
now/’ said the footman.

“ And why would I be ashamed that am
telling no lies, and hindering no one,” said
the countryman, looking up to us with so
sudden a motion, that his hat fell off. I
knew his face, but could not recollect his
name.

<f OhJ there he is, his own honour; I’ve
found him, and axe pardon for my bold-
ness; but it’s because I’ve been all day yes-
terday, and this da}', running through Dub-
lin after yecs, and when certified bv the
lady of the lodgings you w*as in it here, I
could not lave town without my errand,
which is no more than a cheese from my
wife, of her own making, to be given to
your honour’s own hands, and she would
not see me if I did not do it.”

“ Let him come up,” said Lord y****.
<c this,” continued his lordship, turning to
me, w reminds me of Henry the Fourth,
and the Gascon peasant, with his fromages
de bœuf."

tx But our countryman brings his offering
to an abdicated monarch,” said I.

The poor fellow presented his wnfe’s
cheese to me wdth as good a grace as any
courtier could have made his offering. Un-

embarrassed, his manner and his words gave
the natural and easy expression of a grateful
heart. He assured me, that he and his
wife were the happiest couple in all Ireland;
and he hoped I would one day be as happy
myself in a wife as I desarved, who had
made others so, and there were many on
the estate remembered as well as he did the
good I did to the poor during my reign.

Then stepping up closer to me, he said,
in a lower voice, “ I’m Jimmy Riley, that
married onld Noonan’s dâughter ; and now
that it is all over I may tell you a bit of a
sacrety which made me so eager to get to
the speech of your honour, that I might
tell it to your own ear alone—no offence to
this gentleman before whom I’d as soon say
it as yourself, becaase I see he is all as one
as another yourself. Then the thing is—
does your honour remember the boy with
the cord round his body, looking for the
bird’s eggs in the rock, and the ’nonymous
bit of a letter that you got ? ’Twas I wrote
it, and the got soon that threw it to your ho-
nour was a cousin of my own that I sent,
that nobody, nor yourself even, might not
know him ; and the way I got the informa-

tion I never can tell till I die, and then
only to the priest, becaase I swore I would
not never. But don’t go for to think it was
by being a rubble any way; no man can, I
thank my God, charge me with indiffer-
ency. So, rejoiced to see you the same, I
wish you a good morrow, and a long life,
and a happy death—when it comes.”

About this time I frequently used to re-
ceive presents to a considerable amount, and
of things which were most useful to me, but
always without any indication by which I
could discover to whom I was indebted for
them ; at last, by means of my Scotch land-
lady, I traced them to Mr. M‘Leod. His
kindness was so earnest and peremptory,
that it would admit neither thanks nor re-
fusals ; and I submitted to be obliged to a
man for whom I felt such high esteem. I
looked upon it as not the least of his proofs
of regard, that he gave me what I knew he
valued more than any thing else—his time.
Whenever he came to Dublin, though he
was always hurried by business, so that he
had scarcely leisure to eat or sleep, he used
constantly to come to see me in my obscure
lodgings; and when in the country, though

lie hated all letter-writing, except letters of
business, yet he regularly informed me of
every thing that could be interesting to me,
Glenthorn Castle he described as a scene of
riotous living, and of the most wasteful
vulgar extravagance. My poor foster-bro-
ther, the best natured and most generous
fellow in the world, had not sufficient pru-
dence or strength of mind to conduct his
own family; his wife filled the castle with
tribes of her vagabond relations ; she chose
to be descended from one of the kings of
Ireland, and whoever would acknowledge
her high descent, and whoever would claim
relationship with her, were sure to have
their claims allowed, and were welcome to
live in all the barbarian magnificence of
Glenthorn Castle. Every instance that she
could hear of the former Lady Glenthorn’s
extravagance, or of mine—and, alas ! there
were many upon record, she determined to
exceed. Her diamonds, and her pearls, and
her finery, surpassed every thing but the
extravagance of some of the Russian favour-
ites of fortune. Decked out in the most
absurd maimer, this descendant of kings
often, as Mr, McLeod assured me, indulged

in the pleasures of the banquet, till, no
longer able to support the regal diadem, she
was carried by some of the meanest of her
subjects to her bed. The thefts committed
during these interregnums were amazing in
their amount, and; the jewels of the crown
were to be replaced as fast as they were
stolen. Poor Christy all this time was con-
sidered as a mean-spirited cratur, who had
no notion of living like a prince, and whilst
his wife and her relations were revelling in
this unheard-of manner, he was scarcely
considered as the master of the house ; he
lived by the fireside, disregarded in winter,
and in summer he spent his time chiefly in
walking up and down his garden, and pick-
ing. fruit. He once made an attempt to
amuse himself by mending the lock of his
own room-door, but he was detected in the
fact, and exposed to such loud ridicule by
his lady’s favourites,- that he desisted, and
sighing said to Mr. M‘Leod—“ And isn’t
it now a great hardship upon aman like me
to have nothing to do, or not to be let do
any thing? If it had not been for my son
Johnny’s sake, I never would have quit the
forge; and now all will be spent in cosher-

ing, and Johnny, at the last, will never be
a' penny the better, but the worse for my
consinting to be lorded ; and what grieves
me more than all the rest, she is such a
ne gré*, that I haven’t a guinea I can call
my own to send, as I’d always laid out to
do at odd times, such little tokens of my
love and duty, as would be becoming to
my dear foster-brother there in Dublin.—
And now, you tell me, he is going away
too, beyond sea to England, to finish mak-
ing a lawyer of himself in London ; and
what friends will he find there, without
money in his pocket ? and I had been think-
ing this while past, ever since you gave me
notice of his being to quit Ireland, that I
would go up to Dublin myself to see him,
and wish him a good journey kindly before^
he would go ; and I-had a little compliment
here, in a private drawer, that I had col-
lected unknchvnst to my wife, but here last
night she lit upon -it, and now tliat her hand
has closed upon it, not a guinea of it shall
I ever see more, nor a farthing the better

t

* An Irishman in using this word has some confused
. ° * . ] é

notion that it comes from negro; whereas it really means
niggard:	'*	’J ' * ’*	   ‘

of it will my dear foster-brother ever be,
for it or forme ; and this is what grieves me
more than ail, and goes to the quick of my
heart.”

When Mr. MfLeod repeated to me these
lamentations of poor Christy, I immediately
wrote to set his heart at ease, as much as I
could, by the assurance that I was in no
distress for money, and that my three hun-
dred a-year would support me in perfect
comfort and independence, whilst, <c I was
making a lawyer of myself in London.”" I
further assured my good foster-brother, that
I was so well convinced of* his affectionate
and generous dispositions towards me, that
it would be quite unnecessary ever to send
me tokens of his regard.. I' added a few
words of advice about his wife land his
affairs, which, like most words of advice,
were, as I afterwards found,. absolutèly
thrown away.	t j

Though I had taken care to live with so
much economy, that I was not in any
danger of "'being in pecuniary embarrass-
ments, yet I felt much distress of. another
kind in leaving Ireland. I left Miss Dela-
mere surrounded with admirers ; her niother

using her utmost art and parental influence
to induce Gecilia to decide in favour of one
of these gentlemen, who was. a person of
rank and of considerable fortune. I had
seen all this going on, and was bound in
honour the whole time to remain passive,
not to express my own ardent feelings, not
to make the slightest attempt to win the
affections of the woman, who was the ob-
ject of all my labours, of all my exertions.
The last evening that I saw her at Lord
Y****’s, just before I sailed for England,
I suffered more than I thought it was in my
nature to feel, especially at the moment
when I went up to make my bow, and take
leave of her with all the cold çeremony of
a common acquaintance. At parting, how-
ever, in the presence of her mother and of
Lord	Cecilia,	with	her	sweet	smile,

and, I think, with a slight blush, said a
few words, upon which I lived for months
afterwards.

“ I sincerely wish you, sir, the success
your perseverance so well deservës.,,

The recollection of these words, was.often
my solace in ray lonely chambers at the
Temple ; and often* after a day’s hard study.

the repeating them to myself operated as a
charm that dissipated all fatigue, and re-
vived at once my exhausted spirits. To be
sure there were moments, when my fire was
out, and my candle sinking in the socket,
and my mind over-wearied saw things m
the most gloomy point of view; and at
these times I used to give an unfavourable
interpretation to Cecilia’s words, and I
fancied, that they were designed to prevent
my entertaining fallacious hopes, and to
warn me that she must yield tocher mother’s
authority, or perhaps to her own inclina-
tions, in favour of some of her richer lovers.
This idea would have sunk me into utter
despondency, and I should have lost, with
my motive, all power of exertion, had I not
opposed to this apprehension the remem-
brance of Lord Y**#* s countenance, at
the moment Cecilia was speaking to me.
I then felt assured, that his lordship, at
least, understood the words in a favourable
sense, else he would have suffered for me,
and would not certainly have allowed me to
go away with false hopes. Re-animated by
this consideration, I persevered—for it was

by perseverance alone that I could have
any chance of success.

It was fortunate for me, that, stimulated
by a great motive, I thus devoted my whole
time and thoughts to my studies, otherwise
I must, on returning to London, have felt
the total neglect and desertion of all my
former associates in the fashionable world ;
of all the vast number of acquaintance,
who used to lounge away their hours in niy
company, and partake of the luxuries of
my table and the festivities of my house.
Some whom I accidentally met in the street,
just at my re-appearance in town, thought
proper, indeed, to know me again at first,
.that they might gratify their curiosity
about the. paragraphs which they had seen
in the papers, and the reports which they
.had heard of my extraordinary change of
fortune ; but no sooner had they satisfied
.themselves, that all they had heard was true,
<than their interest concerning me ceased.

. When they found, that, instead of being
.Earl of Glenthorn, and the possessor of u,
xlarge estate, I was now reduced to three
hundred a year, lodging.in small chambers

at the Temple, and studying the law, they
never more thought me worthy of their
notice. They affected, according to their
different humours, either to pity me for my
misfortunes, or to blame me for my folly in
giving up my estate ; but they unanimously
expressed astonishment at the idea of my
becoming a member of any active profes-
sion. They declared, that it was impossible
that I could ever endure the labour of the
law, or succeed in such an arduous profes-
sion. Their prophecies intimidated me not;
I was conscious, that these people did not
in the least know me, and I hoped and be-
lieved, that I had powers and a character,
which they were incapable of estimating :
their contempt rather excited than depress-
ed my mind, and their pity I returned with
more sincerity than it was given. I had
lived their life, knew thoroughly what were
its pleasures and its pains, I could compare
the ennui I felt when I was a Bond-street
lounger, with the self-complacency I enjoyed
now that I was occupied in a laborious but
interesting and honourable pursuit. I con-
fess, I had sometimes, however, the weak-
ness to think the worse of human nature.

for what I called the desertion and ingrati-
tude of these my former companions and
flatterers ^ and I could not avoid comparing
the neglect and solitude in which I lived in
London, where I had lavished my fortune,
with the. kindness and hospitalities I had
received in Dublin, where I lived only when
I had no fortune to spend. After a little
time, however, I became more reasonable
and just; for I considered, that it was my
former dissipated mode of life, and impru-
dent choice of associates, which I should
blame for the mortifications I now suffered
from the desertion of companions, who
were, in fact, incapable of being friends.
In Loudon I had lived with the most worth-
less, in Dublin, with the best company ;
and in each place I had been treated as,
in fact, I deserved. But, leaving the his-
tory of my feelings, I must proceed with
my narrative.

One night, after I had dined with an
Irish gentleman, a friend of Lord Y**#*’s,
at the west end of the town, as I was re-
turning late to my lodgings, I was stopped
for some time by a crowd of carriages, in
one of the fashionable streets, I found

that there was a masquerade at the house of
a lady, with whom I had been intimately
acquainted. The clamours of the mob, eager
to see the dresses of those who were alight-
ing from their carriages, the gaudy and
fantastic figures which I beheld by the light
of the flambeaux, the noise and the bustle,
put me in mind of various similar nights of
my past life, ahd it’séèmed to me like a
dream or a réminiscence of some former
state of existence. I thought my present
self preferable, and without casting a long-
ing lingering look behind on the scenes of
vanity, or, as they are called, of pleasure, I
passed on as soon as the crowd would per-
mit, and took my way down a narrow street,
by which I hoped to get, by a shorter way
than usualj to my quiet lodgings. The
rattling of the carriages, the oaths of the
footmen,, and the shouts of the mob, still
sounded in my ears; and the masquerade
figures had scarcely faded from my sight,
when I saw, coming slowly out of a miser-
able entry, by the light of a few wretched
candles and lanterns, a funerah The con-
trast struck me; I stood still to make way
for the coffin, and I heard one say to

/

another, “ What matter how she’s buried!
I tell you, be at as little expense as possible,
for he’ll never pay a farthing.” I had a
confused recollection of having heard the
voice before ; as one of the bearers lifted his
lantern, I saw the face of the woman who
spoke, and had a notion of having seen her

before. I asked whose funeral it was, and

,

I was answered, “ It is one Mrs. Craw-
ley’s—Lady Glenthorn that was,” added
the woman. I heard no more, I was so
much shocked, that I believe I should have
fallen in the street, if I had not been imme-
diately supported by somebody near me.
When I recovered my recollection, I saw
the funeral had moved on some paces, and
the person who supported me, I now found,
was a clergyman., In a mild voice, he told
me that his duty called; him away from me
at present, but he added, that if I would tell
him where I could be found, he would see
me in the morning, and give me any infor-
mation in his, power, as he judged that I was
interested for this unfortunate woman. I
put a card with my address into his hands,
shanked him, and gpt home as well as I
çould. In the morning, the« clergyman

called upon me—a most benevolent man,
unknown to fame Î but known to all the
wretched within the reach of his consolatory
religion. He gave me a melancholy ac-
count of the last days of the unhappy
woman, whose funeral I had just seen. I
told him who I was, and what she had been
to me. She had, almost in her last mo-
ments, as he assured me, expressed her sense
of, what she called, my generosity to her,
and had shown deep contrition for her in-
fidelity. She died in extreme poverty and
wretchedness, with no human being who
was, or even seemed, interested for her, but
a maid-servant (the woman whose voice I
recollected), whose services were purchased
to the last, by presents of whatever clothes
or trinkets were left from the wreck of her
mistress’s fortune. Crawley, it seems, had
behaved brutally to his victim.' After hav-r
ing long delayed to perform his promise of
marrying her, he declared, that he could:
never think of a woman who had been4di-»
vorced, in any other way than as a mistress:'
she, poor weak creature, consented to live
with him on any terms ; but, as his passions
and his interest soon turned to new objects,:

be cast her off without scruple, refusing to
pay any of the tradesmen, who had supplied
her while she bore his name. He refused to
pay the expenses even of her funeral, though
she had shared with him her annuity, and
every thing she possessed. I paid the
funeral expenses, and some arrears of the
maid’s wages, together with such debts for
necessaries, as I had reason to believe were
justly due: the strict economy with which
Lhad lived for three years, and the parting
with a watch and some other trinkets too
fine for my circumstances, enabled me to
pay this money without material incon-
venience, and it was a satisfaction to my
mind. The good clergyman, who managed
these little matters for me, became interested
for me, and our acquaintance with each
other grew every day more intimate and
agreeable. When he found that I was
studying the law, he begged to introduce
me to a brother of his, who had been one
of the most eminent special pleaders in
London, and who now, on a high salary,
undertook to prepare students for the bar.
I was rather unwilling to accept of this'
introduction, because I was not rich enough

to become a pupil of this gentleman’s ; but
my clergyman guessed the cause of my
reluctance, and told me, that his brother
had charged him to overrule all such ob-
jections. cc My brother and I,” continued
he, £C though of different professions, have,
in reality, but one mind between us ; he has
heard from me all the circumstances I know*
of you, and they have interested him so
much, that he desires, in plain English, to
be of any service he can to you.”

This offer was made in earnest ; and if I
had given him the largest salary that could
have been offered by the most opulent of
his pupils, I could not have met with more
attention, or have been instructed with more
zeal than I was, by my new friend, the spe-
cial pleader. He was also so kind as to put
me at ease, by the assurance, that whenever
I should begin to make money by my pro-
fession, he would accept of remuneration.
He jestingly said, that he would make the
same bargain with me, that was made by
the famous sophist Protagoras of old with
his pupil, that he should have the profits of
the first cause I should win—certain that I
would not, like his treacherous pupil Evath-

lus, employ the rhetorician’s arms against
himself, to cheat him out of his promised
reward. My special pleader was not a
mere man of forms and law rigmaroles;
he knew the reason for the forms he used :
he had not only a technical but a rational
knowledge of his business; and what is
still more uncommon, he knew how to teach
what he had learnt. He did not merely
set me down at a desk, and leave me skins
after skins of parchment to pore over in be-
wildered and hopeless stupidity ; he did not
use me like a mere copying machine, to
copy sheet after sheet for him, every morn-
ing from nine till four, and again every
evening, from five till ten. Mine was a
law-tutor of a superior sort. Wherever he
could, he gave me a clew to guide me
through the labyrinth of the law ; and when
no reason could be devised for what the law
directs, he never puzzled me by attempting
to explain what could not be explained ;
lie did not insist upon the total surrender of
my rational faculties, but, with wonderful
liberality, would allow me to call nonsense,
nonsense; and would, after two or three
hours' hard screening, as the ease might re?

quire—for this I thank him more than all
the rest—permit me to yawn, and stretch,
and pity mj^self, and curse the useless re*
petitions of lawyers.

At other times, my judicious special
pleader was in the habits of cheering my
spirits, sinking under the .weight of déclara*
tionSy and replications, and double pleas, and
dilatory pleas ;

“ Of 'horse pleas, traverses, demurrers,

“ Jeofails, imparlances, and errours,

Averments, bars, and protestandoes3*

O ! Cecilia, what pains did I endure to
win your applause ! Yet, that I may state
the whole truth, let me acknowledge, that
even these my dullest, hardest tasks were
light, compared with the burden I formerly
bore of ennui. At length, my period of
probation in my pleader’s office was over;

I escaped from the dusty desk, and the
smell of musty parchments, and the close
smoky room ; I finished eating my terms at
the Temple, and returned, even as the
captain of the packet swore, “ in the face
and teeth of the wind,*' to Dublin.

But, in my haste to return, I must not

omit to notice, for the sake of poetical
equity, that, just when I was leaving Eng-
land, I heard that slow but sure paced
justice at last overtook that wretch, Craw-
ley. He was detected and convicted of
embezzling considerable sums, the property
of a gentleman in Cheshire, who had em-
ployed him as his agent. I saw him, as I
passed through Chester, going to prison,
amidst the execrations of the populace.

CHAPTER XXII.

As I was not, as formerly, asleep in my
carriage on deck, when we came within
sight of the Irish shore, I saw, and hailed
with delight, the beautiful bay of Dublin.
The moment we landed, instead of putting
myself out of humour, as before, with every
thing at the Marine Hotel, I went directly
to my friend. Lord Y*###,s. I made my
sortie from the hotel with so much extraor-
dinary promptitude, that a slip-shod waiter
was forced to pursue me, running or shuf-
fling after me the whole length of the street,
before he could overtake me, with a letter,
which had been “ waiting for my honour,
at the hotel, since yesterday’s Holyhead
packet.” This was a mistake, as the letter-
had never come or gone by any Holyhead
packet; it was only a letter from Mr.
McLeod, to welcome me to Ireland again ;
and to tell me, that he had taken care to
secure good well-aired lodgihgs for me : he

added an account of what was going on at
Glenthorn Castle, The extravagance of
my lady had, by this time, reduced the fa-
mily to great difficulties for ready-money,
as they could neither sell nor mortgage any
part of the Glenthorn estate, which was
settled Qn the son. My poor foster-brother
had, it seems, in vain, attempted to restrain
the wasteful folly of his wife, and to per-
suade Johnny, the young heir apparent, to
lam to be njantleman : in vain Christy tried
to prevail on his lordship, to “ refrain drink-
ing whiskey preferably to claret ;” the youth
pleaded both his father and mother's ex-
amples; and said, that as he was an only
son, and his father had but a life-interest in
the estate, he expected to be indulged; he
repeated continually, “ a short life and a
merry one for me,” Mr. McLeod con-
cluded this letter, by observing, “ that far
from its being a merry life, he never saw
any thing more sad than the life this foolish
boy led ; and that Glenthorn Castle was so
melancholy and disgusting a scene of waste,
riot, and intemperance, that, lie could not
bear to go there.” I was grieved by this
account, for the sake of my poor foster-

brother ; but it would have made a deeper
impression upon me at any other time. I
must own, that I forgot the letter, and all
that it contained, as I knocked at Lord
Y****’s .door.

Lord Y*#** received me with open
•arms, and, with all the kindness of friend-
ship, anticipated the questions I longed, yet
feared, to ask.

“ Cecilia Delamere is still unmarried—
Let these words be enough to content you
for the present ; all the rest is, I hope, in
your own power.”

In my power!—delightful thought! yet
how distant that hope ! For I was now, af-
ter all my labours, but just called to the
bar ; not yet likely, for years, to make a
guinea, much less a fortune, by my pro-
fession. Many of the greatest of our law-
yers have gone circuit, for ten or twelve
years, ■ before they made a hundred a year
by their profession ; and I was at this time
.four and thirty. I confessed to my Lord
that these reflection^ alarmed and
depressed me exceedingly : but he encou-
raged me by this answer—	: j	!	,

“ Persevere—deserve* spccesfcji.and trust

the rest, not to fortune, but to your friends.
It is not required of you to make ten thou-
sand, or one thousand a year, at the bar, in
any given time ; but it is expected from you
to give proofs, that you are capable of con-
quering the indolence of your disposition,
or of your former habits. It is required
from you, to give proofs of intellectual
energy and ability. When you have con-
vinced me, that you have the knowledge
and assiduity that ought to succeed at the
bar, I shall be certain, that only time is
wanting to your actual acquisition of a for-
tune equal to what I ought to require for
my fair friend and relation. When it comes
to that point, it will, my dear sir, be time
enough for me to say more. Till it comes
to tliat point, I have promised Mrs. Dela-
mere, that you will not even attempt to see
her daughter. She blames me for having
permitted Cecilia and you to see so much
of each other, as you did in this house when
you were last in Ireland. Perhaps I wras
imprudent, but your conduct has saved
me from my own reproaches, and I fear no
other. I end where I began, with c Per-
severe—and may the success your perse-

verance deserves, be yonr reward.* If I re-
collect right, these were nearly Miss De-
lamere’s own words at parting with you.**
In truth, I had not forgotten them ; and
I was so much excited by their repetition at
this moment, and.by my excellent friend's
encouraging voice, that all difficulties, all
dread of future labours or evils, vanished
from my view. I went my first circuit, and
made two guineas, and was content; for
Lord Y***# was not disappointed : he told
me it would, it must be so. But though I
made no money, I obtained gradually,
amongst my associates at the bar, the re-
putation for judgement and knowledge. Of
this they could judge by my conversation,
and by the remarks on the trials brought on
before us. The elder counsel had been pre-
pared in my favour, first by Mr. Devereux,
and afterwards by tpy diligence in following
their advice, dtujing my. studies in Dublin:
they perceived, that I had not lost my time
in London, and that my mind was in my
possession. They prophesied that, from the
moment I began to be employed, I should
rise rapidly at . the bar. Opportunity, they

told me, wag, now all that I wanted, and

/!

for that I must wait with patience. I waited *
with as much patience as I could. I had
many friends; some among the judges, some
among a more powerful class of men, the
attorneys. Some of these friends made for
me by Mr. Devereux and Lady Geraldine ;
some by Lord Y###*; some, may I say it,
by myself. Yet the united and zealous en-
deavours, direct and indirect, of partisans
more powerful and more numerous than
mine, had failed to push on, or push up, se-
veral barristers, who were of much longer
standing than myself. Indeed the attempts
to bring them forward had, in some in-
stances, been rather, injurious than service-
able. The law is a, proféssion in which pa-
tronage can do but little for any candidate.
Every man, in his own business, will em-
ploy him whom he believes to have the
most knowledge and ability. The utmost
that even the highest patronage from the
bench can do for a young barrister is, to
give him an opportunity:of distinguishing
himself in preference to other competitors.
This w as ail I hoped-; and I was not de-
ceived in-this hope. It happened, that a
cause of considerable moment,; which had'

come on in our circuit* and to the whole
course of which I had attended with great
care, was removed, by an appeal, to the
courts above, in Dublin. I fortunately, I
should say, prudently, was in the habit of
constant attendance at the courts: the
counsel, who was engaged to manage this
cause, was suddenly taken ill, and was dis-
abled from proceeding. The judge called
upon me; the attorneys, and the other
counsel, were all agreed in wishing me to
take up the business, for they knew I was
prepared, and competent to the question.
The next day the cause, which was then
to be finally decided, came on. I sat up
all night to look over my documents, and to
make myself sure of my points. Ten years
before this, if any one had prophesied this
of me, how little could I have believed
them !

The trial came on—I rose to speak. How
fortunate it was for me, that I did not know
my Lord Y * * * * was in the court. I am
persuaded, that I could not have spoken
three sentences, if he had caught my eye
in the exordium of this my first harangue.
Every man of sensibility— and no man with-

out it can be an orator—every man of sen
sibility knows, that it is more difficult to
speak in the presence of one anxious friend,
of whose judgement we have a high opinion,
than before a thousand auditors who are in-
different, and are strangers to us. Not con-
scious who was listening to me, whose
eyes were upon me, whose heart was beat-
ing for me, I spoke with confidence and
fluency, for I spoke on a subject, of which
I had previously made myself completely
master ; and I was so full of the matter,
that I tjiought not of the words. Perhaps
this, and my having the right side of the
question, were the causes of my success.
I heard a buzz of thanks and applause round
me. The decree was given in our favour.
At this moment I recollected my bargain,
and my debt to my good master, the special
pleader. But all bargains, all debts, all
special pleaders, vanished the next instant
from my mind ; for the crowd opened. Lord
Y * * * * appeared before me, seized my
hand, congratulated me actually with tears
of joy, carried me away to his carriage,
ordered the coachman to drive home—fast!
fast!

“ And now,’* said he to me, cc I am sa-
tisfied.—Your trial is over—successfully
over—You have convinced me of your
powers and your perseverance. All the
hopes of friendship are fulfilled : may all the
hopes of love be accomplished. You have
now my free and full approbation to ad-
dress my ward and relation, Cecilia Dela-
mere. You will have difficulties with her
mother, perhaps ; but none beyond what
we good and great lawyers shall, I trust, be
able to overrule. Mrs. Delamere knows,
that, as I have an unsettled estate, and but
one son, I have it in my power to provide
for her daughter as if she w^ere my own.
It has always been my intention to do so :
but, if you marry Miss Delamere, you will
still find it necessary to pursue your pro-
fession diligently, to maintain her in her
own rank and style of life ; and now that
you have felt the pleasures of successful ex-
ertion, you will consider this necessity as
an additional blessing. From what I have
heard this day, there can be no doubt, that,
by pursuing your profession, you can se-
cure, in a few years, not only ease and com-
petence, but affluence and honours.—Ho-

nours of your own earning.—How far su-
perior to any hereditary title !”

The carriage stopped at Lord y ****’$
door. My friend presented me to Cecilia,
whom I saw this day for the first time since
my return to Ireland. From this hour I
date the commencement of my life of real
happiness. How unlike that life of plea-
sure, to which so many give erroneously the
name of happiness. Lord Y****, with his
powerful influence, supported my cause
with Mrs. Delamere, who was induced,
though with an ill grace, to give up her op-
position.

“ Cecilia,” she said, “ was now three and
twenty, an age to judge for herself; and
Lord	judgment	was	a	great	point

in favour of Mr. O’Donoghoe, to be sure.
And no doubt Mr. O’Donoghoe might make
a fortune, since he had made a figure al-
ready at the bar. In short, she could not
oppose the-wishes of Lord Y####, and the
affections of her daughter, since they were
so fixed. But, after all,” said Mrs. Dela-
mere, “ what a horrid thing it will be to
hear my girl called Mrs. O’Donoghoe ! Only
conceive the sound of—Mrs. O’Donoghoe’s

carriage there!—Mrs. O’Donoghoe’s car-
riage stops the way !”

“ Your objection, my dear madam,” re-
plied Lord Y * * * *, “ is fully as well
founded as that of a young lady of my ac-
quaintance, who could not prevail on her
delicacy to become the wife of a merchant
of the name of Sheepshanks. He very wise-
ly, or very gallantly, paid five hundred
pounds to change his name. I make no
doubt that your future son-in-law will have
no objection to take and bear the name and
arms of Delamere ; and I think I can answer
for it, that a king’s letter may be obtained,
empowering him to do so. With this part
of the business allow me to charge myself.”
I spare the reader the protracted journal
of a lover’s hopes and fears. Cecilia, con-
vinced by the exertions in which I had so
long persevered, that my affection for her
was not only sincere and ardent, but likely
to be permanent, did not torture me by the
vain delays of female coquetry. She be-
lieved, she said, that a man capable of con-
uering habitual indolence could not be of
a feeble character ; and she therefore con-

sented, without hesitation, to intrust her
happiness to my care.

I hope my readers have, by this time, too
favourable an opinion of me to suspect, that,
in my joy, I forgot him who had been my
steady friend in adversity. I wrote to
McLeod as soon as I knew my own happi-
ness, and assured him, that it would be
incomplete without his sympathy. I do
not think there was at our wedding a face
of more sincere, though sober joy, than
M‘Leod’s. Cecilia and I have been now
married above a twelvemonth, and she per-
mits me to say, that she has never, for a
moment, repented her choice. That I have
not relapsed into my former habits, the ju-
dicious and benevolent reader will hence in-
fer: and yet I have been in a situation to
be spoiled ; for I scarcely know a wish of
my heart that remains ungratificd, except
the wish that my friend Mr. Devereux, and
Lady Geraldine, should return from India,
to see and partake of that happiness, of
which they first prepared the foundation.
They first wakened my dormant intellects,
made me know that I had a heart, and that

I was capable of forming a character for
myself. The loss of my estate continued
the course of my education, forced me to
exert my own powers, and to rely upon
myself. My passion for the amiable and
charming Cecilia was afterwards motive
sufficient, to urge me to persevering intel-
lectual labour: fortunately my marriage
has obliged me to continue my exertions,
and the labours of my profession have made
the pleasures of domestic life most delight-
ful. The rich, says a philosophic moralist,
are obliged to labour, if they would be
healthy or happy ; and they call this labour
exercise.

Whether, if I were again a rich man, I
should have sufficient voluntary exertion to
take a due portion of mental and bodily ex-
ercise, I dare not pretend to determine, nor
do I wish to be put to the trial. Desiring
nothing in life but the continuance of the
blessings I possess, I may here conclude
my memoirs, by assuring my readers, that,
after a full experience of most of what are
Called the pleasures of life, I would not ac-
cept of all the Glenthorn and Sherwood
estates, to pass another year of such misery

as I endured whilst I was “ stretched on the
rack of a too easy chair.”

The preceding Memoirs were just ready
for publication, when I received the follow-
ing letter :

To C. O'Donoghoe, Esq.

“ Honoured foster-brother,

“ Since the day I parted yees, nothing in
life but misfortins has happened me, owing
to my being overruled by my w7ife, who
tvould be a lady, all I could say again it.
But that’s over, and there’s no help ; for all
and all that ever she can say will do no
good. The castle’s burnt down all to the
ground, and my Johnny’s dead, and I wish
I wras dead in his place. The occasion of
his death wras owing to drink, which he fell
into from getting too much money, and no-
thing to do—and a snuff of a candle. When
going to bed last night, a little in liquor,
what does he do but takes the candle, and
sticks it up against the head of his bed, as
he used oftentimes to do, without detriment,
in the cabin where he was reared against

the mud-wall. But this was close to an
ould window curtain, and a deal of ould
wo d in the bed, which was all in a smother,
and he lying asleep after drinking, when he
was ever hard to wake, and before he wak-
ened at all, it appears the unfortunit crutur
was smothered, and none heard a sentence
of it, till the ceiling of uiy room, the blue
bed-chamber, with a piece of the big wood
cornice fell, and wakened me with terrible
uproar, and all above and about me was
ilame and smoke, and I just took my wife
on my back, and down the stairs with her»
which did not give in till five minutes after,
and she screeching, and all them relations
she had screeching and running every one
tor themselves, and no thought in any to

J	O	•

save any ting at all, but just what they
could for themselves, and not asarvaut that
was in his riçht rason. I çot the ladder
with a deal of difficulty, and up to Johnny’s
room, and there was a sight for me—he a
corpse, and how even to get the corpse out
of that, myself could not tell, for I was be-
wildered, and how they took me down, I
don't well know. When I came to my
sinses, I was lying on the ground in the

court, and all confusion and screaming still,
and the flames raging worse than ever.—
There’s no use in describing all—the short
of it is, there’s nothing remaining of the
castle, but the stones; and it’s little I’d
think o’ that, if I could have Johnny back
—such as he used to be in my good days ;
since he’s gone I am no good. I write this
to beg you, being married, of which I give
you joy, to Miss Delamerc, that is the
at law, will take possession of all immedi-
ately, for I am as good as dead, and will
give no hindrance, I will go back to my
forge, and, by the help of God, forget at my
work what has passed, and as to my wife,
she may go to her own kith and kin, if she
will not abide by me, I shall not trouble
her long. Mr. M‘Leod is a good man, and
will follow any directions you send, and
may the blessing of God attind, and come
to reign over us again, when you will find
me, as heretofore,

i

“ Your loyal foster-brother,

“ Christy Donoghoe.”

Glenthorn Castle is now rebuilding ; and,
when it is finished, and when I return thither.

I will, if it should be desired by the public,
give a faithful account of my feelings. I
flatter myself that I shall not relapse into
indolence ; my understanding has been cul-
tivated—I have acquired a taste for litera-
ture, and the example of Lord Y****
convinces me, that a man may at once be
rich and noble, and active and happy.