HARRINGTON.



CHAPTER 1

When I was a little boy of about six years old, I was standing with a
maid-servant in the balcony of one of the upper rooms of my father's
house in London--it was the evening of the first day that I had ever
been in London, and my senses had been excited, and almost exhausted, by
the vast variety of objects that were new to me. It was dusk, and I was
growing sleepy, but my attention was awakened by a fresh wonder. As I
stood peeping between the bars of the balcony, I saw star after star of
light appear in quick succession, at a certain height and distance, and
in a regular line, approaching nearer and nearer. I twitched the skirt
of my maid's gown repeatedly, but she was talking to some acquaintance
at the window of a neighbouring house, and she did not attend to me. I
pressed my forehead more closely against the bars of the balcony,
and strained my eyes more eagerly towards the object of my curiosity.
Presently the figure of the lamp-lighter with his blazing torch in one
hand, and his ladder in the other, became visible; and, with as much
delight as philosopher ever enjoyed in discovering the cause of a new
and grand phenomenon, I watched his operations. I saw him fix and mount
his ladder with his little black pot swinging from his arm, and his red
smoking torch waving with astonishing velocity, as he ran up and down
the ladder. Just when he reached the ground, being then within a few
yards of our house, his torch flared on the face and figure of an old
man with a long white beard and a dark visage, who, holding a great bag
slung over one shoulder, walked slowly on, repeating in a low, abrupt,
mysterious tone, the cry of "Old clothes! Old clothes! Old clothes!"
I could not understand the words he said, but as he looked up at
our balcony he saw me--smiled--and I remember thinking that he had a
good-natured countenance. The maid nodded to him; he stood still, and at
the same instant she seized upon me, exclaiming, "Time for you to come
off to bed, Master Harrington."

I resisted, and, clinging to the rails, began kicking and roaring.

"If you don't come quietly this minute, Master Harrington," said she,
"I'll call to Simon the Jew there," pointing to him, "and he shall come
up and carry you away in his great bag."

The old man's eyes were upon me; and to my fancy the look of his
eyes and his whole face had changed in an instant. I was struck with
terror--my hands let go their grasp--and I suffered myself to be carried
off as quietly as my maid could desire. She hurried and huddled me into
bed, bid me go to sleep, and ran down stairs. To sleep I could not go,
but full of fear and curiosity I lay, pondering on the thoughts of Simon
the Jew and his bag, who had come to carry me away in the height of
my joys. His face with the light of the torch upon it appeared and
vanished, and flitted before my eyes. The next morning, when daylight
and courage returned, I asked my maid whether Simon the Jew was a good
or a bad man? Observing the impression that had been made upon my mind,
and foreseeing that the expedient, which she had thus found successful,
might be advantageously repeated, she answered with oracular duplicity,
"Simon the Jew is a good man for naughty boys." The threat of "Simon the
Jew" was for some time afterwards used upon every occasion to reduce me
to passive obedience; and when by frequent repetition this threat had
lost somewhat of its power, she proceeded to tell me, in a mysterious
tone, stories of Jews who had been known to steal poor children for the
purpose of killing, crucifying, and sacrificing them at their secret
feasts and midnight abominations. The less I understood, the more I
believed.

Above all others, there was one story--horrible! most horrible!--which
she used to tell at midnight, about a Jew who lived in Paris in a dark
alley, and who professed to sell pork pies; but it was found out at
last that the pies were not pork--they were made of the flesh of little
children. His wife used to stand at the door of her den to watch for
little children, and, as they were passing, would tempt them in with
cakes and sweetmeats. There was a trap-door in the cellar, and the
children were dragged down; and--Oh! how my blood ran cold when we came
to the terrible trap-door. Were there, I asked, such things in London
now?

Oh, yes! In dark narrow lanes there were Jews now living, and watching
always for such little children as me; I should take care they did not
catch me, whenever I was walking in the streets; and Fowler (that was my
maid's name) added, "There was no knowing what they might do with me."

In our enlightened days, and in the present improved state of education,
it may appear incredible that any nursery-maid could be so wicked as
to relate, or any child of six years old so foolish as to credit, such
tales; but I am speaking of what happened many years ago: nursery-maids
and children, I believe, are very different now from what they were
then; and in further proof of the progress of human knowledge and
reason, we may recollect that many of these very stories of the Jews,
which we now hold too preposterous for the infant and the nursery-maid
to credit, were some centuries ago universally believed by the English
nation, and had furnished more than one of our kings with pretexts for
extortion and massacres.

But to proceed with my story. The impression made on my imagination by
these horrible tales was greater than my nursery-maid intended. Charmed
by the effect she had produced, she was next afraid that I should bring
her into disgrace with my mother, and she extorted from me a
solemn promise that I would never tell any body the secret she had
communicated. From that moment I became her slave, and her victim. I
shudder when I look back to all I suffered during the eighteen months I
was under her tyranny. Every night, the moment she and the candle left
the room, I lay in an indescribable agony of terror; my head under the
bed-clothes, my knees drawn up, in a cold perspiration. I saw faces
around me grinning, glaring, receding, advancing, all turning at last
into the same face of the Jew with the long beard and the terrible eyes;
and that bag, in which I fancied were mangled limbs of children--it
opened to receive me, or fell upon my bed, and lay heavy on my breast,
so that I could neither stir nor scream; in short, it was one continued
nightmare; there was no refreshing sleep for me till the hour when the
candle returned and my tyrant--my protectress, as I thought her--came to
bed. In due course she suffered in her turn; for I could not long endure
this state, and, instead of submitting passively or lying speechless
with terror, the moment she left the room at night I began to roar and
scream till I brought my mother and half the house up to my bedside.
"What could be the matter with the child?" Faithful to my promise, I
never betrayed the secrets of my prison-house. Nothing could be learned
from me but that "I was frightened," that "I could not go to sleep;"
and this, indeed, my trembling condition, and convulsed countenance,
sufficiently proved. My mother, who was passionately fond of me, became
alarmed for my health, and ordered that Fowler should stay in the room
with me every night till I should be quite fast asleep.

So Fowler sat beside my bed every night, singing, caressing, cajoling,
hushing, conjuring me to sleep: and when in about an hour's time, she
flattered herself that her conjurations had succeeded; when my relaxing
muscles gave her hope that she might withdraw her arm unperceived; and
when slowly and dexterously she had accomplished this, and, watching
my eyelashes, and cautiously shading the candle with her hand, she had
happily gained the door; some slipping of the lock, some creaking of the
hinge, some parting sound startled me, and bounce I was upright in
my bed, my eyes wide open, and my voice ready for a roar: so she was
compelled instantly to return, to replace the candle full in my view, to
sit down close beside the bed, and, with her arm once more thrown over
me, she was forced again to repeat that the Jew's bag could not come
there, and, cursing me in her heart, she recommenced her deceitful
songs. She was seldom released in less than two hours. In vain she now
tried by day to chase away the terrors of the night: to undo her own
work was beyond her power. In vain she confessed that her threats were
only to frighten me into being a good boy. In vain she told me that I
was too old now to believe such nonsense. In vain she told me that Simon
was only an old-clothes-man, that his cry was only "Old clothes! Old
clothes!" which she mimicked to take off its terror; its terror was in
that power of association which was beyond her skill to dissolve. In
vain she explained to me that his bag held only my old shoes and her
yellow petticoat. In vain she now offered to let me _see with my
own eyes_. My imagination was by this time proof against ocular
demonstration. One morning early, she took me down stairs into the
housekeeper's room, where Simon and his bag were admitted; she emptied
the bag in my presence, she laughed at my foolish fears, and I pretended
to laugh, but my laugh was hysterical. No power could draw me within
arm's-length of the bag or the Jew. He smiled and smoothed his features,
and stroked his white beard, and, stooping low, stretched out his
inoffensive hand to me; my maid placed sugared almonds on the palm of
that hand, and bid me approach and eat. No! I stood fixed, and if the
Jew approached, I ran back and hid my head in Fowler's lap. If she
attempted to pull or push me forwards I screamed, and at length I sent
forth a scream that wakened my mother--her bell rang, and she was told
that it was only Master Harrington, who was afraid of poor Simon, the
old-clothes-man. Summoned to the side of my mother's bed, I appeared
nearly in hysterics--but still faithful to my promise, I did not betray
my maid;--nothing could be learned from me but that I could not bear the
sight of Old Simon the Jew. My mother blamed Fowler for taking me down
to see such a sort of a person. The equivocating maid replied, that
Master Harrington could not or would not be asy unless she did; and that
indeed now it was impossible to know how to make him asy by day or by
night; that she lost her natural rest with him; and that for her part
she could not pretend to stand it much longer, unless she got her
natural rest. Heaven knows _my_ natural rest was gone! But, besides,
she could not even get her cup of tea in an evening, or stir out for a
mouthful of fresh air, now she was every night to sing Master Harrington
to sleep.

It was but poetical justice that she who had begun by terrifying me, in
order to get me to bed, and out of her way, should end by being forced
to suffer some restraint to cure me of my terrors: but Fowler did not
understand or relish poetical justice, or any kind of justice: besides,
she had heard that Lady de Brantefield was in want of a nursery-maid
for the little Lady Anne Mowbray, who was some years younger than Master
Harrington, and Fowler humbly represented to my mother that she thought
Master Harrington was really growing too stout and too much of a
man; and she confessed quite above and beyond her management and
comprehension; for she never pretended to any thing but the care of
young children that had not arrived at the years of discretion; this she
understood to be the case with the little Lady Anne Mowbray; therefore a
recommendation to Lady de Brantefield would be very desirable, and, she
hoped, but justice to her. The very desirable recommendation was given
by my mother to Lady de Brantefield, who was her particular friend;
nor was my mother in the least to blame on this occasion, for she truly
thought she was doing nothing but justice; had it been otherwise, those
who know how these things are usually managed, would, I trust, never
think of blaming my mother for a _sort of thing_ which they would do,
and doubtless have done themselves without scruple, for a favourite
maid, who is always a _faithful creature_.

So Fowler departed, happy, but I remained unhappy--not with her,
departed my fears. After she was gone I made a sort of compromise with
my conscience, and without absolutely breaking my promise, I made a half
confession to my mother that I had somehow or other horrid notions about
Jews; and that it was the terror I had conceived of Simon the Jew
which prevented me from sleeping all night. My mother felt for me, and
considered my case as no laughing matter.

My mother was a woman of weak health, delicate nerves, and a kind of
morbid sensibility; which I often heard her deplore as a misfortune, but
which I observed every body about her admire as a grace. She lamented
that her dear Harrington, her only son, should so much resemble her in
this exquisite sensibility of the nervous system. But her physician, and
he was a man who certainly knew better than she did, she confessed,
for he was a man who really knew every thing, assured her that this was
indisputably "the genuine temperament of genius."

I soon grew vain of my fears. My antipathy, my _natural_, positively
natural antipathy to the sight or bare idea of a Jew, was talked of
by ladies and by gentlemen; it was exhibited to all my mother's
acquaintance, learned and unlearned; it was a medical, it was a
metaphysical wonder, it was an _idiosyncrasy_, corporeal, or mental, or
both; it was--in short, more nonsense was talked about it than I will
repeat, though I perfectly remember it all; for the importance of which
at this period I became to successive circles of visitors fixed every
circumstance and almost every word indelibly in my memory. It was a
pity that I was not born some years earlier or later, for I should have
flourished a favourite pupil of Mesmer, the animal magnetizer, or
I might at this day be a celebrated somnambulist. No, to do myself
justice, I really had no intention to deceive, at least originally;
but, as it often happens with those who begin by being dupes, I was in
imminent danger of becoming a knave. How I escaped it, I do not well
know. For here, a child scarce seven years old, I saw myself surrounded
by grown-up wise people, who were accounting different ways for that,
of which I alone knew the real, secret, simple cause. They were all,
without my intending it, my dupes. Yet when I felt that I had them in
my power, I did not deceive them much, not much more than I deceived
myself. I never was guilty of deliberate imposture. I went no farther
than affectation and exaggeration, which it was in such circumstances
scarcely possible for me to avoid; for I really often did not know the
difference between my own feelings, and the descriptions I heard given
of what I felt.

Fortunately for my integrity, my understanding, and my health, people
began to grow tired of seeing and talking of Master Harrington. Some
new wonder came into fashion; I think it was Jedediah Buxton, the man of
prodigious memory, who could multiply in his head nine figures by nine;
and who, the first time he was taken to the playhouse, counted all the
steps of the dancers, and all the words uttered by Garrick in Richard
the Third. After Jedediah Buxton, or about the same time, if I recollect
rightly, came George Psalmanazar, from his Island of Formosa, who, with
his pretended Dictionary of the Pormosan language, and the pounds of
raw beef he devoured per day, excited the admiration and engrossed the
attention of the Royal Society and of every curious and fashionable
company in London: so that poor little I was forgotten, as though I had
never been. My mother and myself were left to settle the affair with my
nerves and the Jews, as we could. Between the effects of real fear, and
the exaggerated expression of it to which I had been encouraged, I was
now seriously ill. It is well known that persons have brought on fits
by pretending to have them; and by yielding to feelings, at first slight
and perfectly within the command of the will, have at last acquired
habits beyond the power of their reason, or of their most strenuous
voluntary exertion, to control. Such was my pitiable case; and at the
moment I was most to be pitied, nobody pitied me. Even my mother, now
she had nobody to talk to about me, grew tired of my illness. She was
advised by her physician, on account of her own health, by no means
to keep so close to the house as she had done of late: she went out
therefore every night to refresh herself at crowded parties; and as soon
as she left the house, the nurse and every body in the family left me.
The servants settled it, in my hearing, that there was nothing in life
the matter with me, that my mother and I were equally vapoursome-ish and
_timersome_, and that there was no use in nursing and pampering of me up
in them fantastical _fancifulnesses_: so the nurse, and lady's maid, and
housekeeper, went down all together to _their_ tea; and the housemaid,
who was ordered by the housekeeper to stay with me, soon followed,
charging the under housemaid to supply her place; who went off also in
her turn, leaving me in charge of the cook's daughter, a child of nine
years old, who soon stole out of the room, and scampered away along the
gallery out of the reach of my voice, leaving the room to darkness
and to me--and there I lay, in all the horrors of a low nervous fever,
unpitied and alone.

Shall I be pardoned for having dwelt so long on this history of the
mental and corporeal ills of my childhood? Such details will probably
appear more trivial to the frivolous and ignorant than to the
philosophic and well informed: not only because the best informed are
usually the most indulgent judges, but because they will perceive some
connexion between these apparently puerile details and subjects of
higher importance. Bacon, and one who in later days has successfully
followed him on this ground, point out as one of the most important
subjects of human inquiry, equally necessary to the science of morals
and of medicine, "The history of the power and influence of the
imagination, not only upon the mind and body of the imaginant, but upon
those of other people." This history, so much desired and so necessary,
has been but little advanced. One reason for this may be, that both by
the learned and the unlearned it is usually begun at the wrong end.

"_Belier, mon ami, commences par le commencement_," is excellent advice;
equally applicable to philosophical history and to fairy tale. We must
be content to begin at the beginning, if we would learn the history of
our own minds; we must condescend to be even as little children, if we
would discover or recollect those small causes which early influence
the imagination, and afterwards become strong habits, prejudices, and
passions. In this point of view, if they might possibly tend to turn
public attention in a new direction to an important subject, my puerile
anecdotes may be permitted. These, my experiments, _solitary and
in concert, touching fear_, and _of and concerning sympathies and
antipathies_, are perhaps as well worth noting for future use, as some
of those by which Sir Kenelm Digby and others astonished their own
generation, and which they bequeathed to ungrateful posterity.



CHAPTER 2

My mother, who had a great, and perhaps not altogether a mistaken,
opinion, of the sovereign efficacy of the touch of gold in certain
cases, tried it repeatedly on the hand of the physician who attended me,
and who, in consequence of this application, had promised my cure; but
that not speedily taking place, and my mother, naturally impatient,
beginning to doubt his skill, she determined to rely on her own. On Sir
Kenelm Digby's principle of curing wounds, by anointing the weapon with
which the wound had been inflicted, she resolved to try what could be
done with the Jew, who had been the original cause of my malady, and to
whose malignant influence its continuance might be reasonably ascribed;
accordingly one evening, at the accustomed hour when Simon the
old-clothes-man's cry was heard coming down the street, I being at that
time seized with my usual fit of nerves, and my mother being at her
toilette crowning herself with roses to go to a ball, she ordered
the man to be summoned into the housekeeper's room, and, through the
intervention of the housekeeper, the application was made on the Jew's
hand; and it was finally agreed that the same should be renewed every
twelvemonth, upon condition that he, the said Simon, should never more
be seen or heard under our windows or in our square. My evening attack
of nerves intermitted, as the signal for its coming on, ceased. For
some time I slept quietly: it was but a short interval of peace. Simon,
meanwhile, told his part of the story to his compeers, and the fame of
his annuity ran through street and alley, and spread through the whole
tribe of Israel. The bounty acted directly as an encouragement to ply
the profitable trade, and "Old clothes! Old clothes!" was heard again
punctually under my window; and another and another Jew, each more
hideous than the former, succeeded in the walk. Jews I should not
call them; though such they appeared to be at the time: we afterwards
discovered that they were good Christian beggars, dressed up and daubed,
for the purpose of looking as frightful, and as like the traditionary
representations and vulgar notions of a malicious, revengeful, ominous
looking Shylock as ever whetted his knife. The figures were well got
up; the tone, accent, and action, suited to the parts to be played; the
stage effect perfect, favoured as it was by the distance at which I saw
and wished ever to keep such personages; and as money was given, by my
mother's orders, to these people to send them away, they came the more.
If I went out with a servant to walk, a Jew followed me; if I went in
the carriage with my mother, a Jew was at the coach-door when I got in,
or when I got out: or if we stopped but five minutes at a shop, while my
mother went in, and I was left alone, a Jew's head was at the carriage
window, at the side next me; if I moved to the other side, it was at
the other side; if I pulled up the glass, which I never could do fast
enough, the Jew's head was there opposite to me, fixed as in a frame;
and if I called to the servants to drive it away, I was not much better
off, for at a few paces' distance the figure would stand with his eyes
fixed upon me; and, as if fascinated, though I hated to look at those
eyes, for the life of me I could not turn mine away. The manner in which
I was thus haunted and pursued wherever I went, seemed to my mother
something "really extraordinary;" to myself, something magical and
supernatural. The systematic roguery of beggars, their combinations,
meetings, signals, disguises, transformations, and all the secret tricks
of their trade of deception, were not at this time, as they have in
modern days, been revealed to public view, and attested by indisputable
evidence. Ignorance is always credulous. Much was then thought
wonderful, nay, almost supernatural, which can now be explained and
accounted for, by asy and very ignoble means. My father--for all this
time, though I have never mentioned him, I had a father living--my
father, being in public life, and much occupied with the affairs of the
nation, had little leisure to attend to his family. A great deal went on
in his house, without his knowing any thing about it. He had heard of
my being ill and well, at different hours of the day; but had left it to
the physicians and my mother to manage me till a certain age: but now
I was nine years old, he said it was time I should be taken out of the
hands of the women; so he inquired more particularly into my history,
and, with mine, he heard the story of Simon and the Jews. My mother
said she was glad my father's attention was at last awakened to this
extraordinary business. She expatiated eloquently upon the medical, or,
as she might call them, magical effects of sympathies and antipathies:
on the nervous system; but my father was not at all addicted to a belief
in magic, and he laughed at the whole _female_ doctrine, as he called
it, of sympathies and antipathies: so, declaring that they were all
making fools of themselves, and a Miss Molly of his boy, he took the
business up short with a high hand. There was some trick, some roguery
in it. The Jews were all rascals, he knew, and he would soon _settle_
them. So to work he set with the beadles, and the constables, and the
overseers. The corporation of beggars were not, in those days, so well
grounded in the theory and so alert in the practice of evasion as, by
long experience, they have since become. The society had not then, as
they have now, in a certain lane, their regular rendezvous, called the
_Beggars' Opera_; they had not then, as they have now, in a certain
cellar, an established school for teaching the art of scolding, kept
by an old woman, herself an adept in the art; they had not even their
regular nocturnal feasts, where they planned the operations of the next
day's or the next week's campaign, so that they could not, as they now
do, set at nought the beadle and the parish officers: the system of
signals was not then perfected, and the means of conveying secret and
swift intelligence, by telegraphic science, had not in those days been
practised. The art of begging was then only art without science:
the native genius of knavery unaided by method or discipline. The
consequence was, that the beggars fled before my father's beadles,
constables, and overseers; and they were dispersed through other
parishes, or led into captivity to roundhouses, or consigned to places
called asylums for the poor and indigent, or lodged in workhouses, or
crammed into houses of industry or penitentiary houses, where, by
my father's account of the matter, there was little industry and no
penitence, and from whence the delinquents issued, after their seven
days' captivity, as bad or worse than when they went in. Be that as it
may, the essential point with my father was accomplished: they were got
rid of that season, and before the next season he resolved that I should
be out of the hands of the women, and safe at a public school, which
he considered as a specific for all my complaints, and indeed for every
disease of mind and body incident to childhood. It was the only thing,
he said, to make a man of me. "There was Jack B----, and Thomas D----,
and Dick C----, sons of gentlemen in our county, and young Lord Mowbray
to boot, all at school with Dr. Y----, and what men they were already!"
A respite of a few months was granted, in consideration of my small
stature, and of my mother's all eloquent tears. Meantime my father took
me more to himself; and, mixed with men, I acquired some manly, or what
were called manly, ideas. My attention was awakened, and led to new
things. I took more exercise and less medicine; and with my health and
strength of body my strength of mind and courage increased. My father
made me ashamed of that nervous sensibility of which I had before been
vain. I was glad that the past should be past and forgotten; yet a
painful reminiscence would come over my mind, whenever I heard or saw
the word _Jew_. About this time I first became fond of reading, and I
never saw the word in any page of any book which I happened to open,
without immediately stopping to read the passage. And here I must
observe, that not only in the old story books, where the Jews are as
sure to be wicked as the bad fairies, or bad genii, or allegorical
personifications of the devils, and the vices in the old emblems,
mysteries, moralities, &c.; but in almost every work of fiction, I found
them represented as hateful beings; nay, even in modern tales of very
late years, since I have come to man's estate, I have met with books by
authors professing candour and toleration--books written expressly for
the rising generation, called, if I mistake not, Moral Tales for Young
People; and even in these, wherever the Jews are introduced, I find
that they are invariably represented as beings of a mean, avaricious,
unprincipled, treacherous character. Even the peculiarities of their
persons, the errors of their foreign dialect and pronunciation, were
mimicked and caricatured, as if to render them objects of perpetual
derision and detestation. I am far from wishing to insinuate that such
was the serious intention of these authors. I trust they will in
future benefit by these hints. I simply state the effect which similar
representations in the story books I read, when I was a child, produced
on my mind. They certainly acted most powerfully and injuriously,
strengthening the erroneous association of ideas I had accidentally
formed, and confirming my childish prejudice by what I then thought the
indisputable authority of _printed books_.

About this time also I began to attend to conversation--to the
conversation of gentlemen as well as of ladies; and I listened with a
sort of personal interest and curiosity whenever Jews happened to be
mentioned. I recollect hearing my father talk with horror of some young
gentleman who had been _dealing with the Jews_, I asked what this meant,
and was answered, "'Tis something very like dealing with the devil, my
dear." Those who give a child a witty instead of a rational answer, do
not know how dearly they often make the poor child pay for their jest.
My father added, "It is certain, that when a man once goes to the Jews,
he soon goes to the devil. So Harrington, my boy, I charge you at your
peril, whatever else you do, keep out of the hands of the Jews--never go
near the Jews: if once they catch hold of you, there's an end of you, my
boy."

Had the reasons for the prudential part of this charge been given to
me, and had the nature of the disgraceful transactions with the Hebrew
nation been explained, it would have been full as useful to me, and
rather more just to them. But this was little or no concern of my
father's. With some practical skill in the management of the mind, but
with short-sighted views as to its permanent benefit, and without an
idea of its philosophic moral cultivation, he next undertook to cure me
of the fears which he had contributed to create. He took opportunities
of pointing out how poor, how helpless, how wretched they are; how they
are abused continually, insulted daily, and mocked by the lowest of
servants, or the least of children in our streets; their very name a
by-word of reproach: "He is a Jew--an actual Jew," being the expression
for avarice, hard-heartedness, and fraud. Of their frauds I was told
innumerable stories. In short, the Jews were represented to me as
the lowest, meanest, vilest of mankind, and a conversion of fear into
contempt was partially effected in my mind; partially, I say, for the
conversion was not complete; the two sentiments existed together, and by
an experienced eye, could easily be detected and seen even one through
the other.

Now whoever knows any thing of the passions--and who is there who does
not?--must be aware how readily fear and contempt run into the kindred
feeling of hatred. It was about this time, just before I went to school,
that something relative to the famous _Jew Bill_ became the subject
of vehement discussion at my father's table. My father was not only a
member of parliament, but a man of some consequence with his party. He
had usually been a staunch friend of government; but upon one occasion,
when he first came into parliament, nine or ten years before the time
of which I am now writing, in 1753 or 54, I think, he had voted against
ministry upon this very bill for the Naturalization of the Jews in
England. Government liberally desired that they should be naturalized,
but there was a popular cry against it, and my father on this one
occasion thought the voice of the people was right. After the bill had
been carried half through, it was given up by ministry, the opposition
to it proving so violent. My father was a great stickler for
parliamentary consistency, and moreover he was of an obstinate temper.
Ten years could make no change in his opinions, as he was proud to
declare. There was at this time, during a recess of parliament, some
intention among the London merchants to send addresses to government in
favour of the Jews; and addresses were to be procured from the country.
The county members, and among them of course my father, were written to;
but he was furiously against _the naturalization_: he considered all
who were for it as enemies to England; and, I believe, to religion. He
hastened down to the country to take the sense of his constituents,
or to impress them with his sense of the business. Previously to some
intended county meeting, there were, I remember, various dinners of
constituents at my father's, and attempts after dinner, over a bottle of
wine, to convince them, that they were, or ought to be, of my father's
opinion, and that they had better all join him in the toast of "The Jews
are down, and keep 'em down."

A subject apparently less liable to interest a child of my age could
hardly be imagined; but from my peculiar associations it did attract my
attention. I was curious to know what my father and all the gentlemen
were saying about the Jews at these dinners, from which my mother and
the ladies were excluded. I was eager to claim my privilege of marching
into the dining-room after dinner, and taking my stand beside my
father's elbow; and then I would gradually edge myself on, till I got
possession of half his chair, and established a place for my elbow on
the table. I remember one day sitting for an hour together, turning from
one person to another as each spoke, incapable of comprehending their
arguments, but fully understanding the vehemence of their tones, and
sympathizing in the varying expression of passion; as to the rest, quite
satisfied with making out which speaker was _for_, and which against
the Jews. All those who were against them, I considered as my father's
friends; all those who were _for_ them, I called by a common misnomer,
or metonymy of the passions, my father's enemies, because my father was
their enemy. The feeling of party spirit, which is caught by children as
quickly as it is revealed by men, now combined to strengthen still more
and to exasperate my early prepossession. Astonished by the attention
with which I had this day listened to all that seemed so unlikely to
interest a boy of my age, my father, with a smile and a wink, and a
side nod of his head, not meant, I suppose, for me to see, but which
I noticed the more, pointed me out to the company, by whom it was
unanimously agreed, that my attention was a proof of uncommon abilities,
and an early decided taste for public business. Young Lord Mowbray, a
boy two years older than myself, a gawkee schoolboy, was present; and
had, during this long hour after dinner, manifested sundry symptoms of
impatience, and made many vain efforts to get me out of the room.
After cracking his nuts and his nut-shells, and thrice cracking the
cracked--after suppressing the thick-coming yawns that at last could no
longer be suppressed, he had risen, writhed, stretched, and had fairly
taken himself out of the room. And now he just peeped in, to see if he
could tempt me forth to play.

"No, no," cried my father, "you'll not get Harrington, he is too deep
here in politics--but however, Harrington, my dear boy, 'tis not _the
thing_ for your young companion--go off and play with Mowbray: but stay,
first, since you've been one among us so long, what have we been talking
of?"

"The Jews, to be sure, papa."

"Right," cried my father; "and what about them, my dear?"

"Whether they ought to be let to live in England, or any where."

"Right again, that is right in the main," cried my father; "though that
is a larger view of the subject than we took."

"And what reasons did you hear?" said a gentleman in company.

"Reasons!" interrupted my father: "oh! sir, to call upon the boy for all
the reasons he has heard--But you'll not pose him: speak up, speak up,
Harrington, my boy!"

"I've nothing to say about reasons, sir."

"No! that was not a fair question," said my father; "but, my boy, you
know on which side you are, don't you?"

"To be sure--on your side, father."

"That's right--bravo! To know on which side one is, is one great point
in life."

"And I can tell on which side every one here is." Then going round
the table, I touched the shoulder of each of the company, saying, "A
Jew!--No Jew!" and bursts of applause ensued.

When I came to my father again, he caught me in his arms, kissed me,
patted my head, clapped me on the back, poured out a bumper of wine,
bid me drink his toast, "No Naturalization Bill!--No Jews!" and while I
blundered out the toast, and tossed off the bumper, my father pronounced
me a clever fellow, "a spirited little devil, who, if I did but live to
be a man, would be, he'd engage, an honour to my country, my family, and
my _party_."

Exalted, not to say intoxicated, by my father's praise, when I went to
the drawing-room to the ladies, I became rather more eloquent and noisy
than my mother thought quite becoming; she could not, indeed, forbear
smiling furtively at my wit, when, in answer to some simple country
lady's question of "After all, why should not the Jews be naturalized?"
I, with all the pertness of ignorance, replied, "Why, ma'am, because the
Jews are naturally an unnatural pack of people, and you can't naturalize
what's naturally unnatural."

Kisses and cake in abundance followed--but when the company was gone, my
mamma thought it her duty to say a few words to me upon politeness, and
a few words to my father upon the _too much_ wine he had given me. The
reproach to my father, being just, he could not endure; but instead of
admitting the truth, he vowed, by Jupiter Ammon, that his boy should
never be made a Miss Molly, and to school I should go, by Jupiter Ammon,
next morning, plump.

Now it was well known in our house, that a sentence of my father's
beginning and ending "_by Jupiter Ammon_" admitted of no reply from
any mortal--it was the stamp of fate; no hope of any reversion of the
decree: it seemed to bind even him who uttered the oath beyond his own
power of revocation. My mother was convinced that even her intercession
was vain; so she withdrew, weeping, to the female apartments, where,
surrounded by her maids, the decree of fate was reported, but not
verbatim, after the manner of the gods and goddesses. The maids and the
washerwoman, however, scolded one another very much after their manner,
in a council held at midnight, about my clothes; the result of the whole
was that "they must be found and packed;" and found and packed at last
they were; and the next morning, as decreed, early as Aurora streaked
the east, to school I went, very little thinking of her rosy-tipped
fingers.



CHAPTER 3

My life at school was like that of any other school-boy. I shall not
record, even if I could remember, how often I was flogged when I did
not deserve it, or how often I escaped when I did. Five years of my life
passed away, of which I have nothing to relate but that I learned to
whip a top, and to play at ball and marbles, each in their season; that
I acquired in due course the usual quantity of Greek and Latin; and
perpetrated in my time, I presume, the usual quantity of mischief. But
in the fourth year of my schoolboy life, an opportunity for unusual
mischief occurred. An accident happened, which, however trifling in
itself, can never be effaced from my memory. Every particular connected
with it, is indeed as fresh in my recollection as it was the day
after it happened. It was a circumstance which awakened long dormant
associations, and combined them with all the feelings and principles of
party spirit, which had first been inculcated by my father at home, and
which had been exercised so well and so continually by my companions at
school, as to have become the governing power of my mind.

Schoolboys, as well as men, can find or make a party question, and
quarrel out of any thing or out of nothing. There was a Scotch pedlar,
who used to come every Thursday evening to our school to supply our
various wants and fancies. The Scotch pedlar died, and two candidates
offered to supply his place, an English lad of the name of Dutton, and
a Jew boy of the name of Jacob. Dutton was son to a man who had lived as
butler in Mowbray's family. Lord Mowbray knew the boy to be a rogue,
but thought he was attached to the Mowbrays, and at all events was
determined to support him, as being somehow supposed to be connected
with his family. Reminding me of my early declaration at my father's
table against the naturalization of the Jews, and the _bon-mot_ I had
made, and the toast I had drunk, and the pledge I had given, Mowbray
easily engaged me to join him against the Jew boy; and a zealous
partisan against Jacob I became, canvassing as if my life had depended
upon this point. But in spite of all our zeal, noise, violence, and
cabal, it was the least and the most simple child in the school who
decided the election. This youngster had in secret offered to exchange
a silver pencil-case for a top, or something of such inadequate value:
Jacob, instead of taking advantage of the child, explained to him that
his pencil-case was worth twenty tops. On the day of election, this
little boy, mounted upon the top of a step-ladder, appeared over the
heads of the crowd, and in a small clear voice, and with an eagerness
which fixed attention, related the history of his pencil-case, and ended
by hoping with all his heart that his friend Jacob, his honest Jacob,
might be chosen. Jacob was elected. Mowbray and I, and all our party,
vexed and mortified, became the more inveterate in our aversion to the
successful candidate; and from this moment we determined to plague and
persecute him, till we should force him to _give up_. Every Thursday
evening, the moment he appeared in the school-room, or on the
play-ground, our party commenced the attack upon "the Wandering Jew,"
as we called this poor pedlar; and with every opprobrious nickname, and
every practical jest, that mischievous and incensed schoolboy zealots
could devise, we persecuted and tortured him body and mind. We twanged
at once a hundred Jew's-harps in his ear, and before his eyes we paraded
the effigy of a Jew, dressed in a gabardine of rags and paper. In the
passages through which he was to pass, we set stumbling-blocks in his
way, we threw orange-peel in his path, and when he slipped or fell, we
laughed him to scorn, and we triumphed over him the more, the more he
was hurt, or the more his goods were injured. "We laughed at his losses,
mocked at his gains, scorned his nation, thwarted his bargains, cooled
his friends, heated his enemies--and what was our reason? he was a Jew."

But he was as unlike to Shylock as it is possible to conceive. Without
one thought or look of malice or revenge, he stood before us Thursday
after Thursday, enduring all that our barbarity was pleased to inflict;
he stood patient and long-suffering, and even of this patience and
resignation we made a jest, and a subject of fresh reproach and taunt.

How I, who was not in other cases a cruel or an ill-natured boy, could
be so inhuman to this poor, unprotected, unoffending creature I cannot
conceive; but such in man or boy is the nature of persecution. At
the time it all appeared to me quite natural and proper; a just and
necessary war. The blame, if blame there were, was divided among so
many, that the share of each, my share at least, appeared to me so
small, as not to be worth a moment's consideration. The shame, if we had
any, was carried away in the tide of popular enthusiasm, and drowned
and lost in the fury and noise of the torrent. In looking back upon this
disgraceful scene of our boyish days--boyish indeed I can scarcely call
them, for I was almost, and Mowbray in his own opinion was quite, a
man--I say, in looking back upon this time, I have but one comfort. But
I have _one_, and I will make the most of it: I think I should never
have done so _much_ wrong, had it not been for Mowbray. We were both
horribly to blame; but though I was full as wrong in action, I flatter
myself that I was wrong upon better or upon less bad motives. My
aversion to the Jew, if more absurd and violent, was less interested and
malignant than Mowbray's. I never could stand as he did to parley, and
barter, and chaffer with him--if I had occasion to buy any thing, I was
high and haughty, and at a word; he named his price, I questioned not,
not I--down was thrown my money, my back was turned--and away! As for
stooping to coax him as Mowbray would, when he had a point to gain, I
could not have done it. To ask Jacob to lend me money, to beg him to
give me more time to pay a debt, to cajole and bully him by turns, to
call him alternately usurer and _my honest fellow_, extortioner and
_my friend Jacob_--my tongue could not have uttered the words, my soul
detested the thought; yet all this, and more, could Mowbray do, and did.

Lord Mowbray was deeply in Jacob's debt, especially for two watches
which he had taken upon trial, and which he had kept three months,
making, every Thursday, some fresh excuse for not paying for them; at
last Jacob said that he must have the money, that his employer could
wait no longer, and that he should himself be thrown into prison.
Mowbray said this was only a trick to work upon his compassion, and that
the Jew might very well wait for his money, because he asked twice as
much for the watches as they were worth. Jacob offered to leave the
price to be named by any creditable watchmaker. Lord Mowbray swore
that he was as good a judge as any watchmaker in Christendom. Without
pretending to dispute that point, Jacob finished by declaring, that his
distress was so urgent that he must appeal to some of the masters. "You
little Jewish tell-tale, what do you mean by that pitiful threat? Appeal
to the higher powers if you dare, and I'll make you repent it, you
usurer! Only do, if you dare!" cried he, clenching his hand and opening
it, so as to present, successively, the two ideas of a box on the
ear, and a blow on the stomach. "That was logic and eloquence," added
Mowbray, turning to me. "Some ancient philosopher, _you_ know, or _I_
know, has compared logic to the closed fist, and eloquence to the open
palm. See what it is, Harrington, to make good use of one's learning."

This was all very clever, at least our party thought so, and at the
moment I applauded with the rest, though in my secret soul I thought
Jacob was ill used, and that he ought to have had justice, if he had
not been a Jew. His fear of a prison proved to be no pretence, for it
surmounted his dread of Mowbray's logic and eloquence, and of all the
unpopularity which he was well aware must be the consequence of his
applying to the higher powers. Jacob appealed, and Lord Mowbray was
summoned to appear before the head master, and to answer to the charge.
It was proved that the price set upon the two watches was perfectly
fair, as a watchmaker, who was examined on this point, declared. The
watches had been so damaged during the two months they had been in
his lordship's possession, that Jacob declined taking them back. Lord
Mowbray protested that they were good for nothing when he first had
them.

Then why did he not return them after the first week's trial, when
Jacob had requested either to have them back or to be paid for them? His
lordship had then, as half a dozen of the boys on the Jew's side were
ready to testify, refused to return the watches, declaring they went
very well, and that he would keep them as long as he pleased, and pay
for them when he pleased, and no sooner.

This plain tale put down the Lord Mowbray. His wit and his party now
availed him not; he was publicly reprimanded, and sentenced to pay Jacob
for the watches in a week, or to be expelled from the school. Mowbray
would have desired no better than to leave the school, but he knew that
his mother would never consent to this.

His mother, the Countess de Brantefield, was a Countess in her own
right, and had an estate in her own power;--his father, a simple
commoner, was dead, his mother was his sole guardian.

"That mother of mine," said he to us, "would not hear of her son's being
_turned out_--so I must set my head to work against the head of the head
master, who is at this present moment inditing a letter to her ladyship,
beginning, no doubt, with, '_I am sorry to be obliged to take up my
pen_,' or, '_I am concerned to be under the necessity of sitting down to
inform your ladyship_.' Now I must make haste and inform my lady mother
of the truth with my own pen, which luckily is the pen of a ready
writer. You will see," continued he, "how cleverly I will get myself out
of the scrape with her. I know how to touch her up. There's a folio, at
home, of old Manuscript Memoirs of the De Brantefield family, since the
time of the flood, I believe: it's the only book my dear mother ever
looks into; and she has often made me read it to her, till--no offence
to my long line of ancestry--I cursed it and them; but now I bless it
and them for supplying my happy memory with a case in point, that
will just hit my mother's fancy, and, of course, obtain judgment in my
favour. A case, in the reign of Richard the Second, between a Jew and my
great, great, great, six times great grandfather, whom it is sufficient
to name to have all the blood of all the De Brantefields up in arms for
me against all the Jews that ever were born. So my little Jacob, I have
you."

Mowbray, accordingly, wrote to his mother what he called a
_chef-d'oeuvre_ of a letter, and next post came an answer from Lady de
Brantefield with the money to pay her son's debt, and, as desired and
expected, a strong reproof to her son for his folly in ever dealing with
a Jew. How could he possibly expect not to be cheated, as, by his
own confession, it appeared he had been, grossly? It was the more
extraordinary, since he so well recollected the ever to be lamented case
of Sir Josseline de Brantefield, that her son could, with all his family
experience, be, at this time of day, a dupe to one of a race branded
by the public History of England, and private Memoirs of the De
Brantefields, to all eternity!

Mowbray showed this letter in triumph to all his party. It answered the
double purpose of justifying his own bad opinion of the tribe of Israel,
and of tormenting Jacob.

The next Thursday evening after that on which judgment had been given
against Mowbray, when Jacob appeared in the school-room, the anti-Jewish
party gathered round him, according to the instructions of their leader,
who promised to show them some good sport at the Jew's expense.

"Only give me fair play," said Mowbray, "and stick close, and don't
let him off, for your lives don't let him break through you, till I've
_roasted_ him well."

"There's your money," cried Mowbray, throwing down the money for the
watches--"take it--ay, count it--every penny right--I've paid you by the
day appointed; and, thank Heaven and my friends, the pound of flesh next
my heart is safe from your knife, Shylock!"

Jacob made no reply, but he looked as if he felt much.

"Now tell me, honest Jacob," pursued Mowbray, "honest Jacob, patient
Jacob, tell me, upon your honour, if you know what that word means--upon
your conscience, if you ever heard of any such thing--don't you think
yourself a most pitiful dog, to persist in coming here to be made game
of for twopence? 'Tis wonderful how much your thoroughbred Jew will
do and suffer for gain. We poor good Christians could never do as much
now--could we any soul of us, think you, Jacob?"

"Yes," replied Jacob, "I think you _could_, I think you _would."_

Loud scornful laughter from our party interrupted him; he waited calmly
till it was over, and then continued, "Every soul of you good Christians
would, I think, do as much for a father, if he were in want and dying,
as mine is." There was a silence for the moment: we were all, I believe,
struck, or touched, except Mowbray, who, unembarrassed by feeling, went
on with the same levity of tone as before: "A father in want! Are you
sure now he is not a father of straw, Jacob, set up for the nonce, to
move the compassion of the generous public? Well, I've little faith, but
I've some charity--here's a halfpenny for your father, to begin with."

"Whilst I live, my father shall ask no charity, I hope," said the son,
retreating from the insulting alms which Mowbray still proffered.

"Why now, Jacob, that's bad acting, out o' character, Jacob, my Jew;
for when did any son of Israel, any one of your tribe, or your twelve
tribes, despise a farthing they could get honestly or dishonestly? Now
this is a halfpenny--a good halfpenny. Come, Jacob, take it--don't be
too proud--pocket the affront--consider it's for your father, not for
yourself--you said you'd do much for your father, Jacob."

Jacob's countenance continued rigidly calm, except some little
convulsive twitches about the mouth.

"Spare him, Mowbray," whispered I, pulling back Mowbray's arm; "Jew as
he is, you see he has some feeling about his father."

"Jew as he is, and fool as you are, Harrington," replied Mowbray, aloud,
"do you really believe that this hypocrite cares about his father,
supposing he has one? Do _you_ believe, boys, that a Jew pedlar _can_
love a father gratis, as we do?"

"As we do!" repeated some of the boys: "Oh! no, for his father can't be
as good as ours--he is a Jew!"

"Jacob, is your father good to you?" said one of the little boys.

"He is a good father, sir--cannot be a better father, sir," answered
Jacob: the tears started into his eyes, but he got rid of them in an
instant, before Mowbray saw them, I suppose, for he went on in the same
insulting tone.

"What's that he says? Does he say he has a good father? If he'd swear
it, I would not believe him--a good father is too great a blessing for a
Jew."

"Oh! for shame, Mowbray!" said I. And "For shame! for shame, Mowbray!"
echoed from the opposite, or, as Mowbray called it, from the Jewish
party: they had by this time gathered in a circle at the outside of that
which we had made round Jacob, and many had brought benches, and were
mounted upon them, looking over our heads to see what was going on.

Jacob was now putting the key in his box, which he had set down in the
middle of the circle, and was preparing to open it.

"Stay, stay, honest Jacob! tell us something more about this fine
father; for example, what's his name, and what is he?" "I cannot tell
you what he is, sir," replied Jacob, changing colour, "nor can I tell
you his name."

"Cannot tell me the name of his own father! a precious fellow! Didn't
I tell you 'twas a sham father? So now for the roasting I owe you, Mr.
Jew." There was a large fire in the school-room; Mowbray, by a concerted
movement between him and his friends, shoved the Jew close to the fire,
and barricadoed him up, so that he could not escape, bidding him speak
when he was too hot, and confess the truth.

Jacob was resolutely silent; he would not tell his father's name. He
stood it, till I could stand it no longer, and I insisted upon Mowbray's
letting him off.

"I could not use a dog so," said I.

"A dog, no! nor I; but this is a Jew."

"A fellow-creature," said I.

"A fine discovery! And pray, Harrington, what has made you so
tender-hearted all of a sudden for the Jews?"

"Your being so hard-hearted, Mowbray," said I: "when you persecute and
torture this poor fellow, how can I help speaking?"

"And pray, sir," said Mowbray, "on _which_ side are you speaking?"

"On the side of humanity," said I.

"Fudge! On _whose_ side are you?"

"On yours, Mowbray, if you won't be a tyrant."

"_If!_ If you have a mind to rat, rat _sans phrase_, and run over to the
Jewish side. I always thought you were a Jew at heart, Harrington."

"No more a Jew than yourself, Mowbray, nor so much," said I, standing
firm, and raising my voice, so that I could be heard by all.

"No more a Jew than myself! pray how do you make that out?"

"By being more of a Christian--by sticking more to the maxim 'Do as you
would be done by.'"

"That is a good maxim," said Jacob: a cheer from all sides supported me,
as I advanced to liberate the Jew; but Mowbray, preventing me,
leaped upon Jacob's box, and standing with his legs stretched out,
Colossus-like, "Might makes right," said he, "all the world over. You're
a mighty fine preacher, Master Harrington; let's see if you can preach
me down."

"Let's see if I can't _pull_ you down!" cried I, springing forward:
indignation giving me strength, I seized, and with one jerk pulled the
Colossus forward and swung him to the ground.

"Well done, Harrington!" resounded from all sides. Mowbray, the instant
he recovered his feet, flew at me, furious for vengeance, dealing his
blows with desperate celerity. He was far my overmatch in strength and
size; but I stood up to him. Between the blows, I heard Jacob's voice
in tones of supplication. When I had breath I called out to him, "Jacob!
Escape!" And I heard the words, "Jacob! Jacob! Escape!" repeated near
me.

But, instead of escaping, he stood stock still, reiterating his prayer
to be heard: at last he rushed between us--we paused--both parties
called to us, insisting that we should hear what the Jew had to say.

"Young Lord--," said he, "and _dear_ young gentleman," turning to me,
"let poor Jacob be no more cause now, or ever, of quarrel between you.
He shall trouble you never more. This is the last day, the last minute
he will ever trouble you."

He bowed. Looking round to all, twice to the upper circle, where his
friends stood, he added, "Much obliged--for all kindness--grateful.
Blessings!--Blessings on all!--and may--"

He could say no more; but hastily taking up his box, he retired through
the opening crowd. The door closed after him. Both parties stood silent
for a moment, till Mowbray exclaimed, "Huzza! Dutton for ever! We've won
the day. Dutton for Thursday! Huzza! Huzza! Adieu! Adieu!--_Wandering
Jew!_"

No one echoed his adieu or his huzzas. I never saw man or boy look more
vexed and mortified. All further combat between us ceased, the boys one
and all taking my part and insisting upon peace. The next day Mowbray
offered to lay any wager that Jacob the Jew would appear again on the
ensuing Thursday; and that he would tell his father's name, or at least
come provided, as Mowbray stated it, with a name for his father. These
wagers were taken up, and bets ran high on the subject. Thursday was
anxiously expected--Thursday arrived, but no Jacob. The next Thursday
came--another, and another--and no Jacob!

When it was certain that poor Jacob would appear no more--and when
his motive for resigning, and his words at taking leave were
recollected--and when it became evident that his balls, and his tops,
and his marbles, and his knives, had always been better and _more
reasonable_ than Dutton's, the tide of popularity ran high in his
favour. _Poor Jacob_ was loudly regretted; and as long as schoolboys
could continue to think about the same thing, we continued conjecturing
why it was that Jacob would not tell us his father's name. We made many
attempts to trace him, and to discover his secret; but all our inquiries
proved ineffectual: we could hear no more of Jacob, and our curiosity
died away.

Mowbray, who was two or three years my senior, left school soon
afterwards. We did not meet at the university; he went to Oxford, and I
to Cambridge.



CHAPTER 4

When the mind is full of any one subject, that subject seems to recur
with extraordinary frequency--it appears to pursue or to meet us at
every turn: in every conversation that we hear, in every book we open,
in every newspaper we take up, the reigning idea recurs; and then we are
surprised, and exclaim at these wonderful coincidences. Probably such
happen every day, but pass unobserved when the mind is not intent upon
similar ideas, or excited by any strong analogous feeling.

When the learned Sir Thomas Browne was writing his Essay on the Gardens
of Cyrus, his imagination was so possessed by the idea of a quincunx,
that he is said to have seen a quincunx in every object in nature.
In the same manner, after a Jew had once made an impression on my
imagination, a Jew appeared wherever I went.

As I was on my road to Cambridge, travelling in a stagecoach, whilst we
were slowly going up a steep hill, I looked out of the window, and saw
a man sitting under a hawthorn-bush, reading very intently. There was
a pedlar's box beside him; I thought I knew the box. I called out as we
were passing, and asked the man, "What's the mile-stone?" He looked
up. It was poor Jacob. The beams of the morning sun dazzled him; but he
recognized me immediately, as I saw by the look of joy which instantly
spread over his countenance. I jumped out of the carriage, saying that I
would walk up the hill, and Jacob, putting his book in his pocket, took
up his well-known box, and walked along with me. I began, not by asking
any question about his father, though curiosity was not quite dead
within me, but by observing that he was grown very studious since we
parted; and I asked what book he had been reading so intently. He showed
it to me; but I could make nothing of it, for it was German. He told me
that it was the Life of the celebrated Mendelssohn, the Jew. I had never
heard of this celebrated man. He said that if I had any curiosity about
it, he could lend me a translation which he had in his pack; and with
all the alacrity of good-will, he set down the box to look for the book.

"No, don't trouble yourself--don't open it," said I, putting my hand on
the box. Instantly a smile, and a sigh, and a look of ineffable kindness
and gratitude from Jacob, showed me that all the past rushed upon his
heart.

"Not trouble myself! Oh, Master Harrington," said he, "poor Jacob is not
so ungrateful as that would come to."

"You're only too grateful," said I; "but walk on--keep up with me, and
tell me how your affairs are going on in the world, for I am much
more interested about them than about the life of the celebrated
Mendelssohn."

Is that possible! said his looks of genuine surprised simplicity.
He thanked me, and told me that he was much better in the world than
formerly; that a good friend of his, a London jeweller of his own
tribe, who had employed him as a pedlar, and had been satisfied with his
conduct, had assisted him through his difficulties. This was the last
time he should go his rounds in England as a pedlar; he said he was
going into another and a much better way of business. His friend, the
London jeweller, had recommended him to his brother, a rich Israelite,
who had a valuable store in Gibraltar, and who wanted a young man to
assist him, on whom he could entirely depend. Jacob was going out to
Gibraltar in the course of the next week. "And now, Mr. Harrington,"
said he, changing his tone and speaking with effort, as if he were
conquering some inward feeling, "now it is all over, Mr. Harrington, and
that I am leaving England, and perhaps may never see you again; I wish
before I take leave of you, to tell you, sir, who my father was--_was_,
for he is no more. I did not make a mystery of his name merely to excite
curiosity, as some of the young gentlemen thought, nor because I was
ashamed of my low birth. My father was Simon the old clothes-man. I knew
you would start, Mr. Harrington, at hearing his name. I knew all that
you suffered in your childhood about him, and I once heard you say to
Lord Mowbray who was taunting you with something about _old Simon_, that
you would not have that known, upon any account, to your school-fellows,
for that they would plague you for ever. From that moment I was
determined that _I_ would never be the cause of recalling or publishing
what would be so disagreeable to you. This was the reason why I
persisted in refusing to tell my father's name, when Lord Mowbray
pressed me so to declare it before all your school-fellows. And now,
I hope," concluded he, "that Mr. Harrington will not hate poor Jacob,
though he is the son of--"

He paused. I assured him of my regard: I assured him that I had long
since got rid of all the foolish prejudices of my childhood. I thanked
him for the kindness and generosity he had shown in bearing Mowbray's
persecution for my sake, and in giving up his own situation, rather than
say or do what might have exposed me to ridicule.

Thanking me again for taking, as he said, such a kind interest in the
concerns of a poor Jew like him, he added, with tears in his eyes, that
he wished he might some time see me again: that he should to the
last day of his life remember me, and should pray for my health and
happiness, and that he was sorry he had no way of showing me his
gratitude. Again he recurred to his box, and would open it to show me
the translation of Mendelssohn's Life; or, if that did not interest me,
he begged of me to take my choice from among a few books he had with
him; perhaps one of them might amuse me on my journey, for he knew I was
a _reading young gentleman_.

I could not refuse him. As he opened the packet of books, I saw one
directed to Mr. Israel Lyons, Cambridge. I told Jacob that I was going
to Cambridge. He said he should be there in a few days, for that he took
Cambridge in his road; and he rejoiced that he should see me again. I
gave him a direction to my college, and for his gratification, in truth,
more than for my own, I borrowed the magazine containing the life of
Mendelssohn, which he was so anxious to lend me. We had now reached the
coach at the top of the hill; I got in, and saw Jacob trudging after me
for some time; but, at the first turn of the road, I lost sight of him,
and then, as my two companions in the coach were not very entertaining,
one of them, a great fat man, being fast asleep and snoring, the other,
a pale spare woman, being very sick and very cross, I betook myself to
my magazine. I soon perceived why the life of Mendelssohn had so deeply
interested poor Jacob. Mendelssohn was a Jew, born like himself in
abject poverty, but, by perseverance, he made his way through incredible
difficulties to the highest literary reputation among the most eminent
men of his country and of his age; and obtained the name of the
Jewish Socrates. In consequence of his early, intense, and misapplied
application in his first Jewish school, he was seized at ten years old
with some dreadful nervous disease; this interested me, and I went on
with his history. Of his life I should probably have remembered nothing,
except what related to the nervous disorder; but it so happened, that,
soon after I had read this life, I had occasion to speak of it, and
it was of considerable advantage in introducing me to good company
at Cambridge. A few days after I arrived there, Jacob called on me: I
returned his book, assuring him that it had interested me very much.
"Then, sir," said he, "since you are so fond of learning and learned
men, and so kind to the Jews, there is a countryman of mine now at
Cambridge, whom it will be well worth your while to be acquainted with;
and who, if I may be bold enough to say so, has been prepossessed in
your favour, by hearing of your humanity to poor Jacob."

Touched as I was by his eagerness to be of use to me, I could not help
smiling at Jacob's simplicity and enthusiasm, when he proceeded to
explain, that this person with whom he was so anxious to make me
acquainted was a learned rabbi, who at this time taught Hebrew to
several of the gownsmen of Cambridge. He was the son of a Polish Jew,
who had written a Hebrew grammar, and was himself author of a treatise
on fluxions (since presented to, and accepted by the university), and
moreover the author of a celebrated work on botany. At the moment Jacob
was speaking, certainly my fancy was bent on a phaeton and horses,
rather than on Hebrew or fluxions, and the contrast was striking,
between what he conceived my first objects at Cambridge would be, and
what they really were. However, I thanked him for his good opinion, and
promised to make myself acquainted with his learned countryman. To make
the matter secure, as Jacob was to leave Cambridge the next day, and as
the rabbi was at the house of one of his scholars in the country, and
was not to return to Cambridge till the ensuing week, Jacob left with me
a letter for him, and the very parcel which I had seen directed to
Mr. Israel Lyons: these I engaged to deliver with my own hands. Jacob
departed satisfied--happy in the hope that he had done me a service; and
so in fact it proved. Every father, and every son, who has been at the
university, knows how much depends upon the college companions with whom
a young man first associates. There are usually two sets: if he should
join the dissipated set, it is all over with him, he learns nothing; but
if he should get into the set with whom science and literature are in
fashion, he acquires knowledge, and a taste for knowledge; with all
the ardour inspired by sympathy and emulation, with all the facility
afforded by public libraries and public lectures--the collected and
combined information of the living and the dead--he pursues his studies.
He then fully enjoys the peculiar benefits of a university education,
the union of many minds intent upon the same object, working, with
all the advantages of the scientific division of labour, in a literary
manufactory.

When I went to deliver my packet to Mr. Lyons, I was surprised by seeing
in him a man as different as possible from my preconceived notion of a
Jewish rabbi; I never should have guessed him to be either a rabbi, or
a Jew. I expected to have seen a man nearly as old as Methuselah, with
a reverend beard, dirty and shabby, and with a blue pocket handkerchief.
Instead of which I saw a gay looking man, of middle age, with quick
sparkling black eyes, and altogether a person of modern appearance,
both in dress and address. I thought I must have made a mistake, and
presented my packet with some hesitation, reading aloud the direction to
Mr. Israel Lyons--"I am the man, sir," said he; "our honest friend
Jacob has described you so well, Mr. Harrington--_Mr. William Harrington
Harrington_ (you perceive that I am well informed)--that I feel as if
I had had the pleasure of being acquainted with you for some time. I am
very much obliged by this visit; I should have done myself the honour
to wait upon you, but I returned only yesterday from the country, and
my necessary engagements do not leave as much time for my pleasures as I
could wish."

I perceived by the tone of his address, that, though he was a Hebrew
teacher, he was proud of showing himself to be a man of the world. I
found him in the midst of his Hebrew scholars, and moreover with some
of the best mathematicians, and some of the first literary men in
Cambridge. I was awe-struck, and should have been utterly at a loss,
had it not been for a print of Mendelssohn over the chimney-piece, which
recalled to my mind the life of this great man; by the help of that I
had happily some ideas in common with the learned Jew, and we; entered
immediately into conversation, much to our mutual relief and delight.
Dr. Johnson, in one of his letters, speaking of a first visit from a
young gentleman who had been recommended to his acquaintance, says,
that "the initiatory conversation of two strangers is seldom pleasing
or instructive;" but I am sure that I was both pleased and instructed
during this initiatory conversation, and Mr. Lyons did not appear to be
oppressed or encumbered by my visit. I found by his conversation, that
though he was the son of a great Hebrew grammarian, and himself a great
Hebrew scholar, and though he had written a treatise on fluxions, and a
work on botany, yet he was not a mere mathematician, a mere grammarian,
or a mere botanist, nor yet a dull pedant. In despite of the assertion,
that

  "----Hebrew roots are always found
    To flourish best on barren ground,"

this Hebrew scholar was a man of a remarkably fertile genius. This visit
determined my course, and decided me as to the society which I kept
during the three happy and profitable years I afterwards spent at
Cambridge.

Mr. Israel Lyons is now no more. I hope it is no disrespect to his
memory to say that he had his foibles. It was no secret among our
contemporaries at Cambridge that he was like too many other men
of genius, a little deficient in economy--shall I say it? a little
extravagant. The difficulties into which he brought himself by his
improvidence were, however, always to him matters of jest and raillery;
and often, indeed, proved subjects of triumph, for he was sure to
extricate himself, by some of his many talents, or by some of his many
friends.

I should be very sorry, however, to support the dangerous doctrine, that
men of genius are privileged to have certain faults. I record with quite
a different intention these _facts_, to mark the effect of circumstances
in changing my own prepossessions.

The faults of Israel Lyons were not of that species which I expected to
find in a Jew. Perhaps he was aware that the Hebrew nation is in general
supposed to be too _careful_, and he might, therefore, be a little
vain of his own carelessness about money matters. Be this as it may,
I confess that, at the time, I rather liked him the better for it. His
disregard, on all occasions, of pecuniary interest, gave me a conviction
of his liberal spirit. I was never fond of money, or remarkably careful
of it myself; but I always kept out of debt; and my father gave me such
a liberal allowance, that I had it in my power to assist a friend. Mr.
Lyons' lively disposition and manners took off all that awe which I
might have felt for his learning and genius. I may truly say, that these
three years, which I spent at Cambridge, fixed my character, and the
whole tone and colour of my future life. I do not pretend to say that I
had not, during my time at the university, and afterwards in London, my
follies and imprudences; but my soul did not, like many other souls of
my acquaintance, "embody and embrute." When the time for my quitting
Cambridge arrived, I went to take leave of my learned friend Mr. Israel
Lyons, and to offer him my grateful acknowledgments. In the course of
the conversation I mentioned the childish terror and aversion with which
I had been early taught to look upon a Jew. I rejoiced that, even while
a schoolboy, I had conquered this foolish prejudice; and that at
the university, during those years which often decide our subsequent
opinions in life, it had been my good fortune to become acquainted with
one, whose superior abilities and kindness of disposition, had formed in
my mind associations of quite an opposite nature. Pleased with this
just tribute to his merit, and with the disposition I showed to think
candidly of persons of his persuasion, Mr. Lyons wished to confirm me in
these sentiments, and for this purpose gave me a letter of introduction
to a friend, with whom he was in constant correspondence, Mr. Montenero,
a Jewish gentleman born in Spain, who had early in life quitted that
country, in consequence of his horror of tyranny and persecution. He had
been fortunate enough to carry his wealth, which was very considerable,
safely out of Spain, and had settled in America, where he had enjoyed
perfect toleration and freedom of religious opinion; and as, according
to Mr. Lyons' description of him, this Spanish Jew must, I thought, be
a most accomplished and amiable person, I eagerly accepted the offered
letter of introduction, and resolved that it should be my first business
and pleasure, on arriving in London, to find and make myself acquainted
with Mr. Montenero.



CHAPTER 5

People like myself, of lively imagination, may have often felt that
change of place suddenly extinguishes, or gives a new direction to,
the ardour of their enthusiasm. Such persons may, therefore, naturally
suspect, that, as "my steps retired from Cam's smooth margin," my
enthusiasm for my learned rabbi might gradually fade away; and that,
on my arrival in London, I should forget my desire to become acquainted
with the accomplished Spanish Jew. But it must be observed that, with my
mother's warmth of imagination, I also had, I will not say, I inherited,
some of my father's "_intensity of will_,"--some of that firmness of
adhesion to a preconceived notion or purpose, which in a good cause is
called resolution, in a bad cause obstinacy; and which is either a curse
or a blessing to the possessor, according to the degree or habit of
exercising the reasoning faculty with which he may be endowed.

On my arrival in London, a variety of petty unforeseen obstacles
occurred to prevent my accomplishing my visit to the Spanish Jew. New
and never-ending demands upon my time arose, both in and out of my own
family, so that there seemed a necessity for my spending every hour
of the day and night in a manner wholly independent of my will. There
seemed to be some fatality that set at nought all my previous plans and
calculations. Every morning for a week after my arrival, I regularly
put my letter of introduction to Mr. Montenero into my pocket, resolving
that I would that day find him out, and pay my visit; but after walking
all the morning, to bear and to forbear various engagements, to execute
promised commissions, and to fulfil innumerable duties, I regularly
came home as I went out, with my letter in my pocket, and with the sad
conviction that it was utterly impossible to deliver it that day. These
obstacles, and this contrariety of external circumstances, instead of
bending my will, or making me give up my intention, fixed it more firmly
in my mind, and strengthened my determination. Nor was I the least
shaken from the settled purpose of my soul, by the perversity with which
every one in our house opposed or contemned that purpose. One morning,
when I had my letter and my hat in my hand, I met my father, who after
looking at the direction of the letter, and hearing that I was going on
a visit to a Spanish Jew, asked what business upon earth I could have
with a Jew--cursed the whole race--rejoiced that he had five-and-twenty
years ago voted against their naturalization in England, and ended as
he began, by wondering what in the name of Heaven could make me scrape
acquaintance with such fellows. When, in reply, I mentioned my friend,
Mr. Israel Lyons, and the high character he had drawn of Mr. Montenero,
my father laughed, saying that he would answer for it my friend Israel
was not an Israelite without guile; for that was a description of
Israelite he had never yet seen, and he had seen a confounded deal of
the world. He decided that my accomplished Spanish Jew would prove
an adventurer, and he advised me, a young man, heir to a good English
fortune, to keep out of his foreign clutches: in short, he stuck to the
advice he gave me, and only wished I would stick to the promise I gave
him, when I was ten years old, to have _no dealings with the Jews_.
It was in vain that I endeavoured to give my explanation of the word
_dealings_. My father's temper, naturally positive, had, I observed,
become, as he advanced in years, much more dogmatic and intolerant. I
avoided contradicting his assertions; but I determined to pursue my
own course in a matter where there could be nothing really wrong or
improper. That morning, however, I must, I perceived, as in duty bound,
sacrifice to my father; he took me under the arm, and carried me away
to introduce me to some commonplace member of parliament, who, as he
assured me, was a much fitter and more profitable acquaintance for me
than any member of the synagogue could possibly be.

The next morning, when, firm to my purpose, I was sallying forth, my
mother, with a face of tender expostulation and alarm, stopped me, and
entreated me to listen to her. My mother, whose health had always been
delicate, had within these three last years fallen into what is called a
very nervous state, and this, with her natural timidity and sensibility,
inclined her now to a variety of superstitious feelings--to a belief in
_presentiments_ and presages, omens and dreams, added to her original
belief in sympathies and antipathies. Some of these her peculiarities of
opinion and feeling had perhaps, at first, only been assumed, or yielded
to in her season of youth and beauty, to interest her admirers and
to distinguish herself in society; but as age advanced, they had been
confirmed by habit and weakness, so that what in the beginning might
have been affectation, was in the end reality. She was alarmed, she
said, by the series of strange coincidences which, from my earliest
childhood, had occurred, seeming to connect my fate, in some
extraordinary manner, with these Jews. She recalled all the
circumstances of my illness when I was a child: she confessed that she
had retained a sort of antipathy to the idea of a Jew--a weakness it
might be--but she had had dreams and _presentiments_, and my fortune
had been told her while I was at Cambridge; and some evil, she had been
assured, hung over me within the five ensuing years--some evil connected
with a Jew: in short, she did not absolutely believe in such prophecies,
but still it was extraordinary that the first thing my mind should
be intent upon, in coming to town, should be a Spanish Jew, and she
earnestly wished that I would avoid rather than seek the connexion.

Knowing my mother's turn for the romantic, I had anticipated her
delight at the idea of making acquaintance with a noble-minded travelled
Spaniard; but unluckily her imagination had galloped off in a contrary
direction to mine, and now my only chance was to make her hear reason,
and a very bad chance I knew this to be. I endeavoured to combat her
_presentiment_, and to explain whatever appeared extraordinary in
my love and hatred of the Jews, by recalling the slight and natural
circumstances at school and the university, which had changed my early
prejudice; and I laboured to show that no natural antipathy could have
existed, since it had been completely conquered by humanity and reason;
so that now I had formed what might rather appear a natural sympathy
with the race of Israel. I laboured these points in vain. When I urged
the literary advantages I had reaped from my friendship with Mr. Israel
Lyons, she besought me not to talk of friendship with persons of that
sort. I had now awakened another train of associations, all unfavourable
to my views. My mother _wondered_--for both she and my father were great
_wonderers_, as are all, whether high or low, who have lived only
with one set of people--my mother wondered that, instead of seeking
acquaintance in the city with old Jews and persons of whom nobody had
ever heard, I could not find companions of my own age and rank in life:
for instance, my schoolfellow and friend, Lord Mowbray, who was now in
town, just returned from abroad, a fine young officer, "much admired
here by the ladies, I can assure you, Harrington," added my mother.
This, as I had opportunity of seeing, was perfectly true; four, nearly
five years had made a great apparent change in Mowbray for the better;
his manners were formed; his air that of a man of fashion--a military
man of fashion. He had served a campaign abroad, had been at the siege
of Gibraltar, had much to say, and could say it well. We all know
what astonishing metamorphoses are sometimes wrought even on the most
hopeless subjects, by seeing something of the world, by serving a
campaign or two. How many a light, empty shell of a young man comes home
full, if not of sense, at least of something bearing the semblance of
sense! How many a heavy lout, a dull son of earth, returns enlivened
into a conversable being, who can tell at least of what it has seen,
heard, and felt, if not understood; and who for years, perhaps for ever
afterwards, by the help of telling of other countries, may pass in his
own for a man of solid judgment! Such being the advantages to be derived
by these means, even in the most desperate cases, we may imagine the
great improvement produced in a young man of Lord Mowbray's abilities,
and with his ambition both to please and to shine. In youth, and by
youth, improvement in appearance and manner is easily mistaken for
improvement in mind and principle. All that I had disliked in the
schoolboy--the tyrannical disposition--the cruel temper--the insolent
tone--had disappeared, and in their place I saw the deportment which
distinguished a gentleman. Whatever remained of party spirit, so
different from the wrangling, overbearing, mischievous party spirit of
the boy, was in the man and the officer so happily blended with love of
the service, and with _l'esprit de corps_, that it seemed to add a
fresh grace, animation, and frankness to his manner. The evil spirit of
persecution was dislodged from his soul, or laid asleep within him, and
in its place appeared the conciliating spirit of politeness. He showed
a desire to cultivate my friendship, which still more prepossessed me in
his favour.

Mowbray happened to call upon me soon after the conversation I had
with my mother about the Spanish Jew. I had not been dissuaded from my
purpose by her representations; but I had determined to pay my visit
without saying any thing more about the matter, and to form my own
judgment of the man. A new difficulty, however, occurred: my letter of
introduction had disappeared. I searched my pockets, my portfolios,
my letter-case, every conceivable place, but it was not to be found.
Mowbray obligingly assisted me in this search; but after emptying half
a dozen times over portfolios, pockets, and desks, I was ashamed to give
him more trouble, and I gave up the letter as lost. When Mowbray heard
that this letter, about which I was so anxious, was an introduction to
a Jewish gentleman, he could not forbear rallying me a little, but in a
very agreeable tone, upon the constancy of my Israelitish taste, and the
perfect continuance of my identity.

"I left you, Harrington, and I find you, after four years' absence,
intent upon a Jew; boy and man you are one and the same; and in your
case, 'tis well that the boy and man should an individual make; but for
my part, I am glad to change my identity, like all other mortals, once
in seven years; and I hope you think I have changed for the better."

It was impossible to think otherwise, especially at that moment. In a
frank, open-hearted manner, he talked of his former tyrannical nature,
and blamed himself for our schoolboy quarrel. I was charmed with him,
and the more so, when he entered so warmly or so politely into my
present distress, and sympathized with my madness of the moment. He
suggested all that was possible to be done to supply the loss of the
letter. Could not I get another in its stead? The same friend who gave
me one letter of introduction could write another. No; Mr. Israel Lyons
had left Cambridge, and I knew not where to direct to him. Could not I
present myself to Mr. Montenero without a letter? That might be
rather an awkward proceeding, but I was not to be stopped by any nice
observances, now that I had set my mind upon the matter. Unluckily,
however, I could by no means recollect the exact address of Mr.
Montenero. I was puzzled among half a dozen different streets and
numbers: Mowbray offered to walk with me, and we went to each of these
streets, and to all the variety of numbers I suggested, but in vain; no
Mr. Montenero was to be found. At last, tired and disappointed, as I was
returning home, Mowbray said he thought he could console me for the loss
of my chance of seeing my Spanish Jew, by introducing me to the most
celebrated Jew that ever appeared in England. Then turning into a street
near one of the play-houses, he knocked at the door of a house where
Macklin the actor lodged. Lord Mowbray was well acquainted with him, and
I was delighted to have an opportunity of seeing this celebrated man. He
was at this time past the meridian of ordinary life, but he was in the
zenith of his extraordinary course, and in the full splendour and vigour
of his powers.

"Here," said Mowbray, presenting me to Macklin, "is a young gentleman,
who is ambitious of being acquainted with the most celebrated Jew
that ever appeared in England. Allow me to introduce him to the real,
original Jew of Venice:

    'This is the Jew
    That Shakspeare drew!'

Whose lines are those, Harrington? do you know?"

"_Yours_, I suppose."

"Mine! you do me much honour: no, they are Mr. Pope's. Then you don't
know the anecdote?

"Mr. Pope, in the decline of life, was persuaded by Bolingbroke to go
once more to the play-house, to see Mr. Macklin in the character of
Shylock. According to the custom of the time, Pope was seated among
the critics in the pit. He was so much struck and transported with
admiration, that in the middle of the play, he started up, and repeated
that distich.

"Now, was not I right when I told you, Harrington, that I would
introduce you to the most celebrated Jew in all England, in all
Christendom, in the whole civilized world?"

No one better than Mowbray knew the tone of enthusiastic theatric
admiration in which the heroes of the stage like, or are supposed to
like, to be addressed. Macklin, who was not asy to please, was pleased.
The _lines_, or as Quin insisted upon their being called, the _cordage_
of his face relaxed. He raised, turned, and settled his wig, in sign
of satisfaction; then with a complacent smile gave me a little nod, and
suffered Lord Mowbray to draw him out by degrees into a repetition of
the history of his first attempt to play the character of Shylock. A
play altered from Shakespeare's, and called "The Jew of Venice," had
been for some time in vogue. In this play, the Jew had been represented,
by the actors of the part, as a ludicrous and contemptible, rather than
a detestable character; and when Macklin, recurring to Shakespeare's
original Shylock, proposed, in the revived Merchant of Venice, to play
the part in a serious style, he was scoffed at by the whole company of
his brother actors, and it was with the utmost difficulty he could screw
the manager's courage to the sticking-place, and prevail upon him to
hazard the attempt. Take the account in Macklin's own words. [Footnote:
Vide Macklin's Life.]

"When the long expected night at last arrived, the house was crowded
from top to bottom, with the first company in town. The two front rows
of the pit, as usual, were full of critics. I eyed them," said Macklin,
"I eyed them, sir, through the slit in the curtain, and was glad to
see them there; as I wished, in such a cause, to be tried by a _special
jury_. When I made my appearance in the green-room, dressed for the
part, with my red hat on my head, my piqued beard, my loose black gown,
and with a confidence which I had never before assumed, the performers
all stared at one another, and evidently with a stare of disappointment.
Well, sir, hitherto all was right, till the last bell rung; then, I
confess, my heart began to beat a little: however, I mustered up all the
courage I could, and recommending my cause to Providence, threw myself
boldly on the stage, and was received by one of the loudest thunders of
applause I ever before experienced. The opening scenes being rather tame
and level, I could not expect much applause; but I found myself listened
to: I could hear distinctly in the pit, the words '_Very well--very
well indeed! this man seems to know what he is about_.' These encomiums
warmed me, but did not overset me. I knew where I should have the pull,
which was in the third act, and accordingly at this period I threw out
all my fire; and as the contrasted passions of joy for the merchant's
losses, and grief for the elopement of Jessica, open a fine field for an
actor's powers, I had the good fortune to please beyond my most sanguine
expectations. The whole house was in an uproar of applause; and I was
obliged to pause between the speeches to give it vent, so as to be
heard. The _trial scene_ wound up the fulness of my reputation. Here
I was well listened to, and here I made such a silent yet forcible
impression on my audience, that I retired from this great attempt most
perfectly satisfied. On my return to the green-room, after the play was
over, it was crowded with nobility and critics, who all complimented
me in the warmest and most unbounded manner; and the situation I
felt myself in, I must confess, was one of the most flattering and
intoxicating of my whole life. No money, no title, could purchase what
I felt. By G--, sir, though I was not worth fifty pounds in the world
at that time, yet let me tell you, I was _Charles the Great_ for that
night."

The emphasis and enthusiasm with which Macklin spoke, pleased
me--enthusiastic people are always well pleased with enthusiasm. My
curiosity too was strongly excited to see him play Shylock. I returned
home full of the Jew of Venice; but, nevertheless, not forgetting my
Spanish Jew.--At last, my mother could no longer bear to see me perplex
and vex myself in my fruitless search for the letter, and confessed that
while we were talking the preceding day, finding that no arguments or
persuasions of hers had had any effect, she had determined on what she
called a pious fraud: so, while I was in the room--before my face--while
I was walking up and down, holding forth in praise of my Jewish friend
whom I did know, and my Jewish friend whom I did not know, she had taken
up Mr. Israel Lyons' letter of introduction to Mr. Montenero, and had
thrown it into the fire.

I was very much provoked; but to my mother, and a mother who was so fond
of me, what could I say? After all, I confessed there was a good deal of
fancy in the case on my side as well as on hers. I endeavoured to forget
my disappointment. My imagination turned again to Shylock and Macklin;
and, to please me, my mother promised to make a large party to go with
me to see the Merchant of Venice the next night that Macklin should act;
but, unfortunately, Macklin had just now quarrelled with the manager,
and till this could be made up, there was no chance of his condescending
to perform.

Meantime my mother having, as she thought, fairly got rid of the Jews,
and Mowbray having, as he said, cured me of my present fit of Jewish
insanity, desired to introduce me to his mother and sister. They had
now just come to town from the Priory--Brantefield Priory, an ancient
family-seat, where, much to her daughter's discomfiture, Lady de
Brantefield usually resided eight months of the year, because there
she felt her dignity more safe from contact, and herself of more
indisputable and unrivalled consequence, than in the midst of the
jostling pretensions and modern innovations of the metropolis. At
the Priory every thing attested, recorded, and flattered her pride of
ancient and illustrious descent. In my childhood I had once been with my
mother at the Priory, and I still retained a lively recollection of the
antique wonders of the place. Foremost in my memory came an old picture,
called "Sir Josseline going to the Holy Land," where Sir Josseline de
Mowbray stood, in complete armour, pointing to a horrid figure of a
prostrate Jew, on whose naked back an executioner, with uplifted whip,
was prepared to inflict stripes for some shocking crime.--This picture
had been painted in times when the proportions of the human figure were
little attended to, and when foreshortening was not at all understood:
this added to the horrible effect, for the executioner's arm and scourge
were of tremendous size; Sir Josseline stood miraculously tall, and the
Jew, crouching, supplicating, sprawling, was the most distorted squalid
figure, eyes ever beheld, or imagination could conceive.

After having once beheld it, I could never bear to look upon it again,
nor did I ever afterwards enter the tapestry chamber:--but there were
some other of the antique rooms in which I delighted, and divers pieces
of old furniture which I reverenced. There was an ancient bed, with
scolloped tester, and tarnished quilt, in which Queen Elizabeth had
slept; and a huge embroidered pincushion done by no hands, as you may
guess, but those of the unfortunate Mary, Queen of Scots, who, during
her captivity, certainly worked harder than ever queen worked before or
since.

Then there was an old, worm-eaten chair, in which John of Gaunt had
sat; and I remember that while Lady de Brantefield expressed her just
indignation against the worms, for having dared to attack this precious
relique, I, kneeling to the chair, admired the curious fretwork, the
dusty honeycombs, which these invisible little workmen had excavated.
But John of Gaunt's chair was nothing to King John's table. There was
a little black oak table, too, with broken legs, which was
invaluable--for, as Lady de Brantefield confidently affirmed, King John
of France, and the Black Prince, had sat and supped at it. I marvelled
much in silence--for I had been sharply reproved for some observation
I had unwittingly made on the littleness and crookedness of a dark,
corner-chimneyed nook shown us for the banqueting-room; and I had fallen
into complete disgrace for having called the winding staircases, leading
to the turret-chambers, _back stairs._

Of Lady de Brantefield, the _touch-me-not_ mistress of the mansion, I
had retained a sublime, but not a beautiful idea--I now felt a desire to
see her again, to verify my old notion.

Of Lady Anne Mowbray, who at the time I had been at the Priory, was a
little child, some years younger than myself, I could recollect nothing,
except that she wore a pink sash, of which she was very vain, and that
she had been ushered into the drawing-room after dinner by Mrs. Fowler,
at the sight of whom my inmost soul had recoiled. I remember, indeed,
pitying her little ladyship for being under such dominion, and longing
to ask her whether Fowler had told her the story of Simon the Jew. But
I could never commune with Lady Anne; for either she was up in the
nursery, or Fowler was at her back in the drawing-room, or little Lady
Anne was sitting upright on her stool at her mother's feet, whom I
did not care to approach, and in whose presence I seldom ventured to
speak--consequently my curiosity on this point had, from that hour,
slumbered within me; but it now wakened, upon my mother's proposing
to present me to Lady Anne, and the pleasure of asking and the hope
of obtaining an answer to my long-meditated question, was the chief
gratification I promised myself from the renewal of our acquaintance
with her ladyship.



CHAPTER 6

My recollection of Lady de Brantefield proved wonderfully correct;
she gave me back the image I had in my mind--a stiff, haughty-looking
picture of a faded old beauty. Adhering religiously to the fashion of
the times when she had been worshipped, she made it a point to wear
the old head-dress exactly. She was in black, in a hoop of vast
circumference, and she looked and moved as if her being Countess
de Brantefield in her own right, and concentring in her person five
baronies, ought to be for ever present to the memory of all mankind, as
it was to her own.

My mother presented me to her ladyship. The ceremony of introduction
between a young gentleman and an old lady of those times, performed on
his part with a low bow and look of profound deference, on hers, with
back stepping-curtsy and bridled head, was very different from the
nodding, bobbing trick of the present day. As soon as the _finale_ of
Lady de Brantefield's sentence, touching honour, happiness, and family
connexion, would permit, I receded, and turned from the mother to the
daughter, little Lady Anne Mowbray, a light fantastic figure, bedecked
with "daisies pied," covered with a profusion of tiny French flowers,
whose invisible wire stalks kept in perpetual motion as she turned her
pretty head from side to side. Smiling, sighing, tittering, flirting
with the officers round her, Lady Anne appeared, and seemed as if she
delighted in appearing, as perfect a contrast as possible to her august
and formidable mother. The daughter had seen the ill effect of the
mother's haughty demeanour, and, mistaking reverse of wrong for right,
had given reserve and dignity to the winds. Taught by the happy example
of Colonel Topham, who preceded me, I learned that the low bow would
have been here quite out of place. The sliding bow was for Lady Anne,
and the way was to dash into nonsense with her directly, and full
into the midst of nonsense I dashed. Though her ladyship's perfect
accessibility seemed to promise prompt reply to any question that could
be asked; yet the single one about which I felt any curiosity, I could
not contrive to introduce during the first three hours I was in her
ladyship's company. There was such a quantity of preliminary nonsense
to get through, and so many previous questions to be disposed of: for
example, I was first to decide which of three colours I preferred, all
of them pronounced to be the _prettiest_ in, the universe, _boue de
Paris, oeil de l'empereur_, and a _suppressed sigh_.

At that moment, Lady Anne wore the _suppressed sigh_, but I did not
know it--I mistook it for _boue de Paris_--conceive my ignorance! No two
things in nature, not a horse-chestnut and a chestnut-horse, could be
more different.

Conceive my confusion! and Colonels Topham and Beauclerk standing by.
But I recovered myself in public opinion, by admiring the slipper on her
ladyship's little foot. Now I showed my taste, for this slipper had
but the night before arrived express from Paris, and it was called a
_venez-y voir_; and how a slipper, with a heel so high, and a quarter
so low, could be kept on the foot, or how the fair could walk in it, I
could not conceive, except by the special care of her guardian sylph.

After the _venez-y voir_ had fixed all eyes as desired, the lady turning
alternately to Colonels Topham and Beauclerk, with rapid gestures of
ecstasy, exclaimed, "The _pouf!_ the _pouf!_ Oh! on Wednesday I shall
have the _pouf_!"

Now what manner of thing a _pouf!_ might be, I had not the slightest
conception. "It requireth," said Bacon, "great cunning for a man in
discourse to seem to know that which he knoweth not." Warned by _boue de
Paris_ and the _suppressed sigh_, this time I found safety in silence. I
listened, and learned, first that _un pouf_ was the most charming thing
in the creation; next, that nobody upon earth could be seen in Paris
without one; that one was coming from Mademoiselle Berlin, per favour of
Miss Wilkes, for Lady Anne Mowbray, and that it would be on her head
on Wednesday; and Colonel Topham swore there would be no resisting her
ladyship in the _pouf_, she would look so killing.

"So killing," was the colonel's last.

I now thought that I had Lady Anne's ear to myself; but she ran on to
something else, and I was forced to follow as she skimmed over fields of
nonsense. At last she did stop to take breath, and I did get in my one
question: to which her ladyship replied, "Poor Fowler frighten me? Lord!
No. Like her? oh! yes--dote upon Fowler! didn't you?--No, you hated her,
I remember. Well, but I assure you she's the best creature in the world;
I could always make her do just what I pleased. Positively, I must make
you make it up with her, if I can remember it, when she comes up to
town--she is to come up for my birthday. Mamma, you know, generally
leaves her at the Priory, to take care of all the old trumpery, and show
the place--you know it's a _show place_. But I tell Colonel Topham, when
I've a place of my own, I positively will have it modern, and all
the furniture in the very newest style. I'm so sick of old reliques!
Natural, you know, when _I have been having_ a surfeit all my life of
old beds and chairs, and John of Gaunt and the Black Prince. But the
Black Prince, I remember, was always a vast favourite of yours. Well,
but poor Fowler, you must like her, too--I assure you she always speaks
with tenderness of you; she is really the best old soul! for she's
growing oldish, but so faithful, and so sincere too. Only flatters mamma
sometimes so, I can hardly help laughing in her face; but then you know
mamma, and old ladies, when they come to that pass, must be flattered to
keep them up--'tis but charitable--really right. Poor Fowler's daughter
is to be my maid."

"I did not know Fowler had a daughter, and a daughter grown up."

"Nancy Fowler! not know! Oh! yes, quite grown up, fit to be
married--only a year younger than I am. And there's our old apothecary
in the country has taken such a fancy to her! But he's too old and
_wiggy_--but it would make a sort of lady of her, and her mother will
have it so--but she sha'n't--I've no notion of compulsion. Nancy shall
be my maid, for she is quite out of the common style; can copy verses
for one--I've no time, you know--and draws patterns in a minute. I
declare I don't know which I love best--Fowler or Nancy--poor old
Fowler, I think. Do you know she says I'm so like the print of the Queen
of France. It never struck me; but I'll go and ask Topham."

I perceived that Fowler, wiser grown, had learned how much more secure
the reign of flattery is, than the reign of terror. She was now, as
I found, supreme in the favour of both her young and old lady. The
specimen I have given of Lady Anne Mowbray's conversation, or rather
of Lady Anne's mode of talking, will, I fancy, be amply sufficient
to satiate all curiosity concerning her ladyship's understanding
and character. She had, indeed, like most of the young ladies her
companions--"no character at all."

Female conversation in general was, at this time, very different from
what it is in our happier days. A few bright stars had risen, and shone,
and been admired; but the useful light had not diffused itself. Miss
Talbot's and Miss Carter's learning and piety, Mrs. Montague's genius,
Mrs. Vesey's elegance, and Mrs. Boscawen's [Footnote: See Bas-Bleu.]
"polished ease," had brought female literature into fashion in certain
favoured circles; but it had not, as it has now, become general in
almost every rank of life. Young ladies had, it is true, got beyond the
Spectator and the Guardian: Richardson's novels had done much towards
opening a larger field of discussion. One of Miss Burney's excellent
novels had appeared, and had made an era in London conversation; but
still it was rather venturing out of the safe course for a young lady to
talk of books, even of novels; it was not, as it is now, expected that
she should know what is going on in the literary world. The Edinburgh
and Quarterly Reviews, and varieties of literary and scientific
journals, had not

    "Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way."

Before there was a regular demand and an established market, there were
certain hawkers and pedlars of literature, fetchers and carriers of
bays, and at every turn copies of impromptus, charades, and lines by the
honourable Miss C----, and the honourable Mrs. D----, were put into my
hands by young ladies, begging for praise, which it was seldom in my
power conscientiously to bestow. I early had a foreboding--one of my
mother's _presentiments_--that I should come to disgrace with Lady Anne
Mowbray about some of these cursed scraps of poetry. Her ladyship had
one--shall I say?--_peculiarity_. She could not bear that any one should
differ from her in matters of taste; and though she regularly disclaimed
being a reading lady, she was most assured of what she was most
ignorant. With the assistance of Fowler's flattery, together with
that of all the hangers-on at Brantefield Priory, her temper had been
rendered incapable of bearing contradiction. But this defect was not
immediately apparent: on the contrary, Lady Anne was generally thought
a pleasant, good-humoured creature, and most people wondered that the
daughter could be so different from the mother. Lady de Brantefield was
universally known to be positive and prejudiced. Her prejudices were
all old-fashioned, and ran directly counter to the habits of her
acquaintance. Lady Anne's, on the contrary, were all in favour of the
present fashion, whatever it might be, and ran smoothly with the
popular stream. The violence of her temper could, therefore, scarcely
be suspected, till something opposed the current: a small obstacle would
then do the business--would raise the stream suddenly to a surprising
height, and would produce a tremendous noise. It was my ill fortune
one unlucky day to cross Lady Anne Mowbray's humour, and to oppose her
opinion. It was about a trifle; but trifles, indeed, made, with her,
the sum of human things. She came one morning, as it was her custom, to
loiter away her time at my mother's till the proper hour for going
out to visit. For five minutes she sat at some fashionable kind of
work--_wafer work_, I think it was called, a work which has been long
since consigned to the mice; then her ladyship yawned, and exclaiming,
"Oh, those lines of Lord Chesterfield's, which Colonel Topham gave me;
I'll copy them into my album. Where's my _album_?--Mrs. Harrington, I
lent it to you. Oh! here it is. Mr. Harrington, you will finish copying
this for me." So I was set down to the _album_ to copy--_Advice to a
Lady in Autumn_.

    "Asses' milk, half a pint, take at seven, or before."

My mother, who saw that I did not relish the asses' milk, put in a word
for me.

"My dear Lady Anne, it is not worth while to write these lines in
your _album_, for they were in print long ago, in every lady's old
memorandum-book, and in Dodsley's Collection, I believe."

"But still that was quite a different thing," Lady Anne said, "from
having them in her _album_; so Mr. Harrington must be so very good." I
did not understand the particular use of copying in my illegible hand
what could be so much better read in print; but it was all-sufficient
that her ladyship chose it. When I had copied the verses I must, Lady
Anne said, read the lines, and admire them. But I had read them twenty
times before, and I could not say that they were as fresh the twentieth
reading as at the first. Lord Mowbray came in, and she ran to her
brother:--"Mowbray! can any thing in nature be prettier than these
verses of Lord Chesterfield? Mowbray, you, who are a judge, listen to
these two lines:

    'The dews of the evening moat carefully shun,
    Those tears of the sky for the loss of the sun.'

_Now_, here's your friend, Mr. Harrington, says it's only a
_prettiness_, and something about Ovid. I'm sure I wish you'd advise
some of your friends to leave their classics, as you did, at the musty
university. What have we to do with Ovid in London? You, yourself, Mr.
Harrington, who set up for such a critic, what fault can you find, pray,
with

    'Keep all cold from your breast, there's already too much?'"

By the lady's tone of voice, raised complexion, and whole air of the
head, I saw the danger was imminent, and to avoid the coming storm, I
sheltered myself under the cover of modesty; but Mowbray dragged me out
to make sport for himself.

"Oh! Harrington, that will never do. No critic! No judge! You! with all
your college honours fresh about you. Come, come, Harrington, pronounce
you must. Is this poetry or not?

    '_Keep all cold from your breast, there's already too much_.'"

"Whether prose or poetry, I pronounce it to be very good advice."

"Good advice! the thing of all others I have the most detested from my
childhood," cried Lady Anne; "but I insist upon it, it is good poetry,
Mr. Harrington."

"And equally good grammar, and good English, and good sense," cried her
brother, in an ironical tone. "Come, Harrington, acknowledge it all,
man--all equally. Never stop half way, when a young--and such a young
lady, summons you to surrender to her your truth, taste, and common
sense. Gi' her a' the plea, or you'll get na good of a woman's hands."

"So, sir!--So, my lord, you are against me too, and you are mocking me
too, I find. I humbly thank you, gentlemen," cried Lady Anne, in a high
tone of disdain; "from a colonel in the army, and a nobleman who has
been on the continent, I might have expected more politeness. From a
Cambridge scholar no wonder!"

My mother laid down her netting in the middle of a row, and came to
keep the peace. But it was too late; Lady Anne was deaf and blind with
passion. She confessed she could not see of what use either of the
universities were in this world, except to make bears and bores of young
men.

Her ladyship, fluent in anger beyond conception, poured, as she turned
from her brother to me, and from me to her brother, a flood of nonsense,
which, when it had once broken bounds, there was no restraining in its
course. Amazed at the torrent, my mother stood aghast; Mowbray burst
into unextinguishable laughter: I preserved my gravity as long as
I possibly could; I felt the risible infection seizing me, and that
malicious Mowbray, just when he saw me in the struggle--the agony--sent
me back such an image of my own length of face, that there was no
withstanding it. I, too, breaking all bounds of decorum, gave way to
visible and audible laughter; and from which I was first recovered by
seeing the lady burst into tears, and by hearing, at the same moment,
my mother pronounce in a tone of grave displeasure, "Very ill-bred,
Harrington!" My mother's tone of displeasure affecting me much more than
the young lady's tears, I hastened to beg pardon, and I humbled myself
before Lady Anne; but she spurned me, and Mowbray laughed the more.
Mowbray, I believe, really wished that I should like his sister; yet
he could not refrain from indulging his taste for ridicule, even at her
expense. My mother wondered how Lord Mowbray could tease his sister in
such a manner; and as for Harrington, she really thought he had known
that the first law of good-breeding is never to say or do any thing that
can hurt another person's feelings.

"Never _intentionally_ to hurt another's feelings, ma'am," said I; "I
hope you will allow me to plead the innocence of my intentions."

"Oh, yes! there was no malicious _intent_: Not guilty--Not guilty!"
cried Mowbray. "Anne, you acquit him there, don't you, Anne?"

Anne sobbed, but spoke not.

"It is little consolation, and no compensation, to the person who is
hurt," said my mother, "that the offender pleads he did not mean to say
or do any thing rude: a rude thing is a rude thing--the intention is
nothing--all we are to judge of is the fact."

"Well, but after all, in fact," said Mowbray, "there was nothing to make
any body seriously angry."

"Of that every body's own feelings must be the best judge," said my
mother, "the best and the sole judge."

"Thank Heaven! that is not the law of libel _yet_, not the law of the
land _yet_," said Mowbray; "no knowing what we may come to. Would it not
be hard, ma'am, to constitute the feelings of one person _always_ sole
judge of the intentions of another? though in cases like the present I
submit. Let it be a ruled case, that the sensibility of a lady shall be
the measure of a gentleman's guilt."

"I don't judge of these things by rule and measure," said my mother:
"try my smelling-bottle, my dear." Very few people, especially women of
delicate nerves and quick feelings, could, as my mother observed, bear
to be laughed at; particularly by those they loved; and especially
before other people who did not know them perfectly. My mother was
persuaded, she said, that Lord Mowbray had not reflected on all this
when he had laughed so inconsiderately.

Mowbray allowed that he certainly had not reflected when he had laughed
inconsiderately. "So come, come. Anne, sister Anne, be friends!" then
playfully tapping his sister on the back, the pretty, but sullen back
of the neck, he tried to raise the drooping head; but finding the chin
resist the upward motion, and retire resentfully from his touch, he
turned upon his heel, and addressing himself to me, "Well! Harrington,"
said he, "the news of the day, the news of the theatre, which I was
bringing you full speed, when I stumbled upon this cursed half-pint
of asses' milk, which Mrs.. Harrington was so angry with me for
overturning--"

"But what's the news, my lord?" said my mother.

"News! not for you, ma'am, only for Harrington; news of the Jews."

"The Jews!" said my mother.

"The Jews!" said I, both in the same breath, but in very different
tones.

"_Jews_, did I say?" replied Mowbray: "Jew, I should have said."

"Mr. Montenero?" cried I.

"Montenero!--Can you think of nothing but Mr. Montenero, whom you've
never seen, and never will see?"

"Thank you for that, my lord," said my mother; "one touch from you is
worth a hundred from me."

"But of what Jew then are you talking? and what's your news, my lord?"
said I.

"My news is only--for Heaven's sake, Harrington, do not look expecting
a mountain, for 'tis only a mouse. The news is, that Macklin, the honest
Jew of Venice, has got the pound, or whatever number of pounds he wanted
to get from the manager's heart; the quarrel's made up, and if you keep
your senses, you may have a chance to see, next week, this famous Jew of
Venice."

"I am heartily glad of it!" cried I, with enthusiasm.

"And is that all?" said my mother, coldly.

"Mr. Harrington," said Lady Anne, "is really so enthusiastic about some
things, and so cold about others, there is no understanding him; he is
very, very _odd_."

Notwithstanding all the pains my mother took to atone for my offence,
and notwithstanding that I had humbled myself to the dust to obtain
pardon, I was not forgiven.

Lady de Brantefield, Lady Anne, and some other company, dined with us;
and Mowbray, who seemed to be really sorry that he had vexed his sister,
and that he had in the heyday of his spirit unveiled to me her defects
of temper, did every thing in his power to make up matters between us.
At dinner he placed me beside Anne, little sister Anne; but no caressing
tone, no diminutive of kindness in English, or soft Italian, could touch
her heart, or move the gloomy purpose of her soul. Her sulky ladyship
almost turned her back upon me, as she listened only to Colonel Topham,
who was on the other side. Mowbray coaxed her to eat, but she refused
every thing he offered--would not accept even his compliments--his
compliments on her _pouf_--would not allow him to show her off, as he
well knew how to do, to advantage; would not, when he exerted himself
to prevent her silence from being remarked, smile at any one of the many
entertaining things he said; she would not, in short, even passively
permit his attempts to cover her ill-humour, and to make things pass off
well.

In the evening, when the higher powers drew off to cards, and when Lady
Anne had her phalanx of young ladies round her; and whilst I stood a
defenceless young man at her mercy, she made me feel her vengeance. She
talked _at_ me continually, and at every opening gave me sly cuts, which
she flattered herself I felt sorely.

Mowbray turned off the blows as fast as they were aimed, or treated them
all as playful traits of lover-like malice, tokens of a lady's favour.

"Ha! a good cut, Harrington!--Happy man!--Up to you there, Harrington!
High favour, when a lady condescends to remember and retaliate. Paid you
for old scores!--Sign you're in her books now!--'No more to say to you,
Mr. Harrington'--a fair challenge to say a great deal more to her."

And all the time her ladyship was aiming to vex, and hoping that I was
heartily mortified, as from my silence and melancholy countenance she
concluded that I was; in reality I stood deploring that so pretty a
creature had so mean a mind. The only vexation I felt was at her having
destroyed the possibility of my enjoying that delightful illusion which
beauty creates.

My mother, who had been, as she said, quite nervous all this evening, at
last brought Lady Anne to terms, and patched up a peace, by prevailing
on Lady de Brantefield, who could not be prevailed on by any one else,
to make a party to go to some new play which Lady Anne was _dying_ to
see. It was a sentimental comedy, and I did not much like it; however, I
was all complaisance for my mother's sake, and she in return renewed her
promise to go with me to patronize Shylock. By the extraordinary anxiety
my mother showed, and by the pains she took that there should be peace
betwixt Lady Anne and me, I perceived, what had never before struck me,
that my mother wished me to be in love with her ladyship.

Now I could sooner have been in love with Lady de Brantefield. Give her
back a decent share of youth and beauty, I think I could sooner have
liked the mother than the daughter.

By the force and plastic power of my imagination, I could have turned
and moulded Lady de Brantefield, with all her repulsive haughtiness,
into a Clelia, or a Princess de Cleves, or something of the Richardson
full-dressed heroine, with hoop and fan, and _stand off, man_!--and then
there would be cruelty and difficulty, and incomprehensibility-something
to be conquered--something to be wooed and won. But with Lady Anne
Mowbray my imagination had nothing to work upon, no point to dwell on,
nothing on which a lover's fancy could feed: there was no doubt, no
hope, no fear, no reserve of manner, no dignity of mind.

My mother, I believe, now saw that it would not do, at least for the
present; but she had known many of Cupid's capricious turns. Lady Anne
was extremely pretty, and universally allowed to be so; her ladyship was
much taken notice of in public, and my mother knew that young men are
vain of having their mistresses and wives admired by our sex. But my
mother calculated ill as to my particular character. To the Opera and to
Ranelagh, to the Pantheon, and to all the fashionable public places of
the day, I had had the honour of attending Lady Anne; and I had had the
glory of hearing "Beautiful!" "Who is she?"--and "Who is with her?" My
vanity, I own, had been flattered, but no further. My imagination was
always too powerful, my passions too sincere and too romantic, to be
ruled by the opinions of others, or to become the dupe of personal
vanity. My mother had fancied that a month or two in London would
have brought my imagination down to be content with the realities of
fashionable life. My mother was right as to the fact, but wrong in
her conclusion. This did not incline me more towards Lady Anne, but it
disinclined me towards marriage.

My exalted ideas of love were lowered--my morning visions of life
fled--I was dispirited.

Mowbray had rallied me on my pining for Cambridge, and on preferring
Israel Lyons, the Jew, to him and all the best company in London.

He had hurried me about with him to all manner of gaieties, but still I
was not happy; my mind--my heart wanted something more.

In this my London life, I found it irksome that I could never, as at
dear Cambridge, pause upon my own reflections. If I stopped awhile, "to
plume contemplation's wings, so ruffled and impaired," some of the low
realities, some of the impertinent necessities of fashionable life,
would tread on my heels. The order of the day or night was for ever
pressed upon me--and the order of the day was now to go to this new
sentimental comedy--my mother's favourite actor, the silver-toned
Barry, was to play the lover of the piece; so she was sure of as many
fashionable young ladies as her box could possibly hold. At this period,
in England, every fashionable belle declared herself the partisan
of some actor or actress; and every fashionable beau aspired to the
character of a dramatic critic. Mowbray, of course, was distinguished
in that line, and his pretty little sister, Lady Anne, was, at least in
face, formed to grace the front box. The hours of the great world were
earlier then than they are now, and nothing interfered, indeed nothing
would have been suffered to interfere, with the hour for the play. As a
veteran wit described it, "There were at this time four estates in
the English Constitution, kings, lords, commons, and the theatre."
Statesmen, courtiers, poets, philosophers, crowded pell mell with
the white-gloved beaux to the stage box and the pit. It was thought
well-bred, it was _the thing_ to be in the boxes before the third act,
even before the second, nay, incredible as it may in these times appear,
before the first act began. Our fashionable party was seated some
minutes before the curtain drew up.



CHAPTER 7

The beaux and belles in the boxes of the crowded theatre had bowed and
curtsied, for in those days beaux did bow and belles did curtsy; the
impatient sticks in the pit, and shrill catcalls in the gallery, had
begun to contend with the music in the orchestra; and thrice had we
surveyed the house to recognize every body whom any body knew, when the
door of the box next to ours, the only box that had remained empty, was
thrown open, and in poured an over-dressed party, whom _nobody knew_.
Lady de Brantefield, after one reconnoitring glance, pronounced them to
be city Goths and Vandals; and without resting her glass upon them for
half a moment, turned it to some more profitable field of speculation.
There was no gentleman of this party, but a portly matron, towering
above the rest, seemed the principal mover and orderer of the group. The
awkward bustle they made, facing and backing, placing and changing of
places, and the difficulty they found in seating themselves, were in
striking contrast with the high-bred ease of the ladies of our party.
Lady Anne Mowbray looked down upon their operations with a pretty air
of quiet surprise, tinctured with horror; while my mother's shrinking
delicacy endeavoured to suggest some idea of propriety to the city
matron, who having taken her station next to us in the second row, had
at last seated herself so that a considerable portion of the back part
of her head-dress was in my mother's face: moreover, the citizen's
huge arm, with its enormous gauze cuff, leaning on the partition which
divided, or ought to have divided, her from us, considerably passed the
line of demarcation. Lady de Brantefield, with all the pride of all
the De Brantefields since the Norman Conquest concentrated in her
countenance, threw an excommunicating, withering look upon the arm--but
the elbow felt it not--it never stirred. The lady seemed not to be made
of penetrable stuff. In happy ignorance she sat fanning herself for a
few seconds; then suddenly starting and stretching forward to the front
row, where five of her young ladies were wedged, she aimed with her fan
at each of their backs in quick succession, and in a more than audible
whisper asked, "Cecy! Issy! Henny! Queeney! Miss Coates, where's
Berry?"--All eyes turned to look for Berry--"Oh! mercy, behind in the
back row! Miss Berry, that must not be--come forward, here's my place
or Queeney's," cried Mrs. Coates, stretching backwards with her utmost
might to seize some one in the farthest corner of the back row, who
had hitherto been invisible. We expected to see in Miss Berry another
vulgarian produced, but to our surprise, we beheld one who seemed of a
different order of beings from those by whom she was surrounded. Lord
Mowbray and I looked at each other, struck by the same sentiment, pained
for this elegant timid young creature, as we saw her, all blushing and
reluctant, forced by the irresistible fat orderer of all things to "step
up on the seat," to step forward from bench to bench, and then wait in
painful pre-eminence while Issy, and Cecy, and Queeney, and Miss Coates,
settled how they could make room, or which should vacate her seat in her
favour. In spite of the awkwardness of her situation she stood with such
quiet, resigned, yet dignified grace, that ridicule could not touch her.
The moment she was seated with her back to us, and out of hearing, Lady
de Brantefield turned to her son and asked "Who is she?"

"An East Indian, I should guess, by her dark complexion," whispered Lady
Anne to me.

Some feather or lappet intercepted my view of her face, but from
the glimpse I caught of it as she passed, it struck me as uncommonly
interesting, though with a peculiar expression and foreign air--whether
she was handsome or not, though called upon to decide, I could not
determine. But now our attention was fixed on the stage. It was
announced to the audience that, owing to the sudden illness of the actor
who was to have performed the principal part in the comedy advertised
for this night, there was a necessity for changing the play, and they
should give in its stead the Merchant of Venice.

The Merchant of Venice and Macklin the Jew!--Murmurs of discontent from
the ladies in my box, who regretted their sentimental comedy and their
silver-toned Barry, were all lost upon me; I rejoiced that I should see
Macklin in Shylock. Before the performance began, my attention was again
caught by the proceedings of the persons in the next box. There seemed
to be some sudden cause of distress, as I gathered from exclamations
of "How unlucky!--How distressing!--What shall we do?--What can we
do?--Better go away--carriage gone!--must sit it out--May be she won't
mind--Oh! she will--Shylock!--Jessica!--How unfortunate!--poor Miss
Berry!"

"Jessica!" whispered Mowbray to me, with an arch look: "let me pass,"
added he, just touching my shoulder. He made his way to a young lady at
the other end of the box; and I, occupying immediately the ceded place,
stationed myself so that I had a better view of my object, and could
observe her without being seen by any one. She was perfectly still, and
took no notice of the whispering of the people about her, though, from
an indescribable expression in the air of the back of her head and neck,
I was convinced that she heard all that passed among the young and old
ladies in her box. The play went on--Shylock appeared--I forgot every
thing but him.--Such a countenance!--Such an expression of latent malice
and revenge, of every thing detestable in human nature! Whether speaking
or silent, the Jew fixed and kept possession of my attention. It was an
incomparable piece of acting: much as my expectations had been raised,
it far surpassed any thing I had conceived--I forgot it was Macklin, I
thought only of Shylock. In my enthusiasm I stood up, I pressed forward,
I leaned far over towards the stage, that I might not lose a word, a
look, a gesture. When the act finished, as the curtain fell, and the
thunders of applause died away, I heard a soft low sigh near me; I
looked, and saw the Jewess! She had turned away from the young ladies
her companions, and had endeavoured to screen herself behind the pillar
against which I had been leaning. I had, for the first time, a full view
of her face and of her countenance, of great sensibility, painfully,
proudly repressed. She looked up while my eyes were fixed upon her--a
sudden and deep colour spread over her face and mounted to her temples.
In my confusion I did the very thing I should not have done, and said
the thing of all others I should not have said. I expressed a fear
that I had been standing in such a manner as to prevent her from seeing
Shylock; she bowed mildly, and was, I believe, going to speak.

"You have indeed, sir," interrupted Mrs. Coates, "stood so that nobody
could see nothing but yourself. So, since you mention it, and speak
without an introduction, excuse me if I suggest, against the next act,
that this young lady has never been at a play before in her life--in
Lon'on, at least. And though it i'n't the play I should have chose for
her, yet since she is here, 'tis better she should see something
than nothing, if gentlemen will give her leave." I bowed in sign of
submission and repentance; and was retiring, so as to leave my place
vacant, and a full opening to the stage. But in a sweet, gentlewomanlike
voice, seeming, perhaps, more delightful from contrast, the young lady
said that she had seen and could see quite as much as she wished of the
play; and she begged that I would not quit my place. "I should oblige
her," she added, in a lower tone, "if I would continue to stand as I had
done." I obeyed, and placed myself so as to screen her from observation
during the whole of the next act. But now, my pleasure in the play was
over. I could no longer enjoy Macklin's incomparable acting; I was so
apprehensive of the pain which it must give to the young Jewess. At
every stroke, characteristic of the skilful actor, or of the master
poet, I felt a strange mixture of admiration and regret. I almost wished
that Shakspeare had not written, or Macklin had not acted the part so
powerfully: my imagination formed such a strong conception of the pain
the Jewess was feeling, and my inverted sympathy, if I may so call
it, so overpowered my direct and natural feelings, that at every fresh
development of the Jew's villany I shrunk as though I had myself been a
Jew.

Each exclamation against this dog of a Jew, and still more every general
reflection on Jewish usury, avarice, and cruelty, I felt poignantly. No
power of imagination could make me pity Shylock, but I felt the force of
some of his appeals to justice; and some passages struck me in quite a
new light on the Jewish side of the question.

    "Many a time, and oft,
    In the Rialto, you have rated me,
    About my moneys and my usances;
    Still have I borne it with a patient shrug;
    For sufferance is the badge of all our tribe.
    You call me misbeliever! cut-throat dog!
    And spit upon my Jewish gabardine;
    And all, for use of that which is my own.
    Well, then, it now appears you need my help.
    Go to, then--you come to me, and you say,
    Shylock, we would have moneys; you say so.
    Shall I bend low, and in a bondsman key,
    With bated breath, and whisp'ring humbleness, Say this:
    Fair sir, you spit on me last Wednesday;
    You spurned me such a day; another time
    You called me dog; and for these courtesies
    I'll lend you thus much moneys?"

As far as Shylock was concerned, I was well content he should be used in
such a sort; but if it had been any other human creature, any other Jew
even--if it had been poor Jacob, for instance, whose image crossed my
recollection--I believe I should have taken part with him. Again, I
was well satisfied that Antonio should have hindered Shylock of half
a million, should have laughed at his losses, thwarted his bargains,
cooled his friends, heated his enemies; Shylock deserved all this: but
when he came to,


_

<i style="font-style: italic;">"What's his reason?--I am a Jew_<span      style="font-style: italic;">.
&nbsp;Hath not a Jew eyes? hath not a Jew hands, organs,
&nbsp;dimensions, senses, affections, passions? fed with &nbsp;the same
food, hurt with the same weapons, subject &nbsp;to the same diseases,
healed by the same means, &nbsp;warmed and cooled by the same winter and
summer as &nbsp;a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not bleed? if yo
 &nbsp;us, do not we die? and if you wrong us, shall we not
&nbsp;revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will &nbsp;resemble
you in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, &nbsp;what is his humility?
Revenge. If a Christian &nbsp;wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance
be, by &nbsp;Christian example? Why, revenge."</span>

I felt at once horror of the individual Shylock, and submission to the
strength of his appeal. During the third act, during the Jessica
scenes, I longed so much to have a look at the Jewess, that I took an
opportunity of changing my position. The ladies in our box were now so
happily occupied with some young officers of the guards, that there was
no farther danger of their staring at the Jewess. I was so placed that
I could see her, without being seen; and during the succeeding acts, my
attention was chiefly directed to the study of all the changes in
her expressive countenance. I now saw and heard the play solely with
reference to her feelings; I anticipated every stroke which could touch
her, and became every moment more and more interested and delighted with
her, from the perception that my anticipations were just, and that I
perfectly knew how to read her soul, and interpret her countenance. I
saw that the struggle to repress her emotion was often the utmost she
could endure; and at last I saw, or fancied I saw, that she grew so
pale, that, as she closed her eyes at the same instant, I was certain
she was going to faint; and quite forgetting that I was an utter
stranger to her, I started forward--and then unprovided with an apology,
could only turn to Mrs. Coates, and fear that the heat of the house was
too much for this young lady. Mrs. Coates, alarmed immediately, wished
they could get her out into the air, and regretted that her gentlemen
were not with their party to-night--there could be no getting servants
or carriage--what could be done? I eagerly offered my services, which
were accepted, and we conducted the young lady out. She did not
faint; she struggled against it; and it was evident that there was no
affectation in the case; but, on the contrary, an anxious desire not
to give trouble, and a great dread of exposing herself to public
observation. The carriage, as Mrs. Coates repeated twenty times, was
ordered not to come till after the farce, and she kept on hoping and
hoping that Miss Berry would be stout enough to go back to see "The Maid
of the Oaks." Miss Berry did her utmost to support herself; and said she
believed she was now quite well, and could return; but I saw she wished
to get away, and I ran to see if a chair could be had. Lord Mowbray, who
had assisted in conducting the ladies out, now followed me; he saw, and
called to one of his footmen, and despatched him for a chair.

"There, now," said Mowbray, "we may leave the rest to Mrs. Coates, who
can elbow her own way through it. Come back with me--Mrs. Abingdon plays
Lady Bab Lardoon, her favourite character--she is incomparable, and I
would not miss it for the world."

I begged Mowbray to go back, for I could not leave these ladies.

"Well," said he, parting from me, and pursuing his own way, "I see how
it is--I see how it will be. These things are ruled in heaven above, or
hell beneath. 'Tis in vain struggling with one's destiny--so you to your
Jewess, and I to my little Jessica. We shall have her again, I hope, in
the farce, the prettiest creature I ever saw."

Mowbray hastened back to his box, and how long it might be between my
return to the Jewess, and the arrival of the chair, I do not know: it
seemed to me not above two minutes, but Mowbray insisted upon it, that
it was a full quarter of an hour. He came to me again, just as I had
received one look of silent gratitude; and while I was putting the young
lady into the chair, and bustling Mrs. Coates was giving her orders and
address to the servant, Mowbray whispered me that my mother was in an
agony, and had sent him out to see what was become of me. Mrs. Coates,
all thanks, and apologies, and hurry, now literally elbowed her way back
to her box, expressing her reiterated fears that we should lose the best
part of "The Maid of the Oaks," which was the only farce she made it a
rule ever to stay for. In spite of her hurry and her incessant talking,
I named the thing I was intent upon. I said, that with her permission
I should do myself the honour of calling upon her the next morning to
inquire after Miss Berry's health.

"I am sure, sir," she replied, "Mr. Alderman Coates, and myself, will be
particularly glad of the honour of seeing you tomorrow, or any time;
and moreover, sir, the young lady," added she, with a shrewd, and to
me offensive smile, "the young lady no doubt's well worth inquiring
after--a great heiress, as the saying is, as rich as a Jew she'll be,
Miss Montenero."

"Miss Montenero!" repeated Lord Mowbray and I, in the same instant. "I
thought," said I, "this young lady's name was Berry.

"Berry, yes--Berry, we call her, we who are intimate, I call her
for short--that is short for Berenice, which is her out o' the way
Christian, that is, Jewish name. Mr. Montenero, the father, is a Spanish
or American Jew, I'm not clear which, but he's a charming man for a Jew,
and the daughter most uncommon fond of him, to a degree! Can't, now,
bear any reflections the most distant, now, sir, upon the Jews, which
was what distressed me when I found the play was to be this Jew of
Venice, and I would have come away, only that I couldn't possibly." Here
Mrs. Coates, without any mercy upon my curiosity about Mr. Montenero and
his daughter, digressed into a subject utterly uninteresting to me, and
would explain to us the reasons why Mr. Alderman Coates and Mr. Peter
Coates her son were not this night of her party. This lasted till we
reached her box, and then she had so much to say to all the Miss Issys,
Cecys, and Hennys, that it was with the utmost difficulty I could, even
by carefully watching my moment, obtain a card with her own, and another
with Miss Montenero's address. This time there was no danger of my
losing it. I rejoiced to see that Miss Montenero did not live with Mrs.
Coates.

For all further satisfaction of my curiosity, I was obliged to wait till
the next morning.



CHAPTER 8

During the whole of the night, sleeping or waking, the images of the
fair Jewess, of Shylock, and of Mrs. Coates, were continually recurring,
and turning into one another in a most provoking manner. At breakfast my
mother did not appear; my father said that she had not slept well, and
that she would breakfast in her own apartment; this was not unusual; but
I was particularly sorry that it happened this morning, because, being
left _tte--tte_ with my father, and he full of a debate on the
malt-tax, which he undertook to read to me from the rival papers, and to
make me understand its merits, I was compelled to sit three-quarters of
an hour longer after breakfast than I had intended; so that the plan
I had formed of waiting upon Mr. Montenero very early, before he could
have gone out for the day, was disconcerted. When at last my father had
fairly finished, when he had taken his hat and his cane, and departing
left me, as I thought, happily at liberty to go in search of my Jewess,
another detainer came. At the foot of the stairs my mother's woman
appeared, waiting to let me know that her lady begged I would not go out
till she had seen me--adding, that she would be with me in less than a
quarter of an hour.

I flung down my hat, I believe, with rather too marked an expression of
impatience; but five minutes afterwards came a knock at the door. Mr.
Montenero was announced, and I blessed my mother, my father, and the
malt-tax, for having detained me at home. The first appearance of Mr.
Montenero more than answered my expectations. He had that indescribable
air, which, independently of the fashion of the day, or the mode of any
particular country, distinguishes a gentleman--dignified, courteous, and
free from affectation. From his features, he might have been thought
a Spaniard--from his complexion, an East Indian; but he had a peculiar
cast of countenance, which seemed not to belong to either nation. He had
uncommonly black penetrating eyes, with a serious, rather melancholy,
but very benevolent expression. He was past the meridian of life.
The lines in his face were strongly marked; but they were not the
common-place wrinkles of ignoble age, nor the contractions of any of the
vulgar passions: they seemed to be the traces of thought and feeling. He
entered into conversation directly and easily. I need not say that this
conversation was immediately interesting, for he spoke of Berenice. His
thanks to me were, I thought, peculiarly gentlemanlike, neither too
much nor too little. Of course, I left him at liberty to attribute her
indisposition to the heat of the playhouse, and I stood prepared to
avoid mentioning Shylock to Jewish ears; but I was both surprised and
pleased by the openness and courage with which he spoke on the very
subject from which I had fancied he would have shrunk. Instead of
looking for any excuse for Miss Montenero's indisposition, he at once
named the real cause; she had been, he said, deeply affected by the
representation of Shylock; that detestable Jew, whom the genius of the
greatest poet that ever wrote, and the talents of one of the greatest
actors who had ever appeared, had conspired to render an object of
public execration. "But recently arrived in London," continued Mr.
Montenero, "I have not had personal opportunity of judging of this
actor's talent; but no Englishman can have felt more strongly than I
have, the power of your Shakspeare's genius to touch and rend the human
heart."

Mr. Montenero spoke English with a foreign accent, and something of a
foreign idiom; but his ideas and feelings forced their way regardless of
grammatical precision, and I thought his foreign accent agreeable. To an
Englishman, what accent that conveys the praise of Shakspeare can
fail to be agreeable? The most certain method by which a foreigner
an introduce himself at once to the good-will and good opinion of an
Englishman, is by thus doing homage to this national object of idolatry.
I perceived that Mr. Montenero's was not a mere compliment--he spoke
with real feeling. "In this instance," resumed he, "we poor Jews have
felt your Shakspeare's power to our cost--too severely, and, considering
all the circumstances, rather unjustly, you are aware."

"_Considering all the circumstances_," I did not precisely understand;
but I endeavoured, as well as I could, to make some general apology for
Shakspeare's severity, by adverting to the time when he wrote, and the
prejudices which then prevailed.

"True," said he; "and as a dramatic poet, it was his business, I
acknowledge, to take advantage of the popular prejudice as a _power_--as
a means of dramatic pathos and effect; yet you will acknowledge that we
Jews must feel it peculiarly hard, that the truth of the story on which
the poet founded his plot should have been completely sacrificed to
fiction, so that the characters were not only misrepresented, but
reversed."

I did not know to what Mr. Montenero meant to allude: however, I
endeavoured to pass it off with a slight bow of general acquiescence,
and the hundred-times-quoted remark, that poets always succeed better
in fiction than in truth. Mr. Montenero had quick penetration--he saw my
evasion, and would not let me off so easily. He explained.

"In the _true_ story, [Footnote: See Stevens' Life of Sixtus V.,
and Malone's Shakspeare.] from which Shakspeare took the plot of the
Merchant of Venice, it was a Christian who acted the part of the Jew,
and the Jew that of the Christian; it was a Christian who insisted
upon having the pound of flesh from next the Jew's heart. But," as
Mr. Montenero repeated, "Shakspeare was right, as a dramatic poet, in
reversing the characters."

Seeing me struck, and a little confounded, by this statement, and even
by his candour, Mr. Montenero said, that perhaps his was only the Jewish
version of the story, and he quickly went on to another subject, one far
more agreeable to me--to Berenice. He hoped that I did not suspect her
of affectation from any thing that had passed; he was aware, little
as he knew of fine ladies, that they sometimes were pleased to make
themselves noticed, perhaps rather troublesome, by the display of their
sensibility; but he assured me that his Berenice was not of this sort.

Of this I was perfectly convinced. The moment he pronounced the name of
Berenice, he paused, and looked as if he were afraid he should say too
much of her; and I suppose I looked as I felt--afraid that he would not
say enough. He gently bowed his head and went on. "There are reasons why
she was peculiarly touched and moved by that exhibition. Till she came
to Europe--to England--she was not aware, at least not practically
aware, of the strong prepossessions which still prevail against us
Jews." He then told me that his daughter had passed her childhood
chiefly in America, "in a happy part of that country, where religious
distinctions are scarcely known--where characters and talents are all
sufficient to attain advancement--where the Jews form a respectable part
of the community--where, in most instances, they are liberally educated,
many following the honourable professions of law and physic with credit
and ability, and associating with the best society that country affords.
Living in a retired village, her father's the only family of Israelites
who resided in or near it, all her juvenile friendships and attachments
had been formed with those of different persuasions; yet each had looked
upon the variations of the other as things of course, or rather as
things which do not affect the moral character--differences which take
place in every society."--"My daughter was, therefore, ill prepared,"
said Mr. Montenero, "for European prepossessions; and with her feeling
heart and strong affection for those she loves, no wonder that she has
often suffered, especially on my account, since we came to England; and
she has become, to a fault, tender and susceptible on this point."

I could not admit that there was any fault on her part; but I regretted
that England should be numbered among the countries subject to such
prejudices. I hoped, I added, that such illiberality was now confined to
the vulgar, that is, the ill-educated and the ill-informed.

The well-educated and well-informed, he answered, were, of course,
always the most liberal, and were usually the same in all countries. He
begged pardon if he had expressed himself too generally with respect
to England. It was the common fault of strangers and foreigners to
generalize too quickly, and to judge precipitately of the whole of a
community from a part. The fact was, that he had, by the business which
brought him to London, been unfortunately thrown among some vulgar
rich of contracted minds, who, though they were, as he was willing
to believe, essentially good and good-natured persons, had made his
Berenice suffer, sometimes more than they could imagine, by their want
of delicacy, and want of toleration.

As Mr. Montenero spoke these words, the image of vulgar, ordering Mrs.
Coates--that image which had persecuted me half the night, by ever
obtruding between me and the fair Jewess--rose again full in my view. I
settled immediately, that it was she and her tribe of Issys, and Cecys,
and Hennys, and Queeneys, were "the vulgar rich" to whom Mr. Montenero
alluded. I warmly expressed my indignation against those who could
have been so brutal as to make Miss Montenero suffer by their vile
prejudices.

"_Brutal_," Mr. Montenero repeated, smiling at my warmth, "is too strong
an expression: there was no brutality in the case. I must have expressed
myself ill to give rise to such an idea. There was only a little want of
consideration for the feelings of others--a little want of liberality."

Even so I could not bear the thought that Miss Montenero should have
been, on her first arrival in England, thrown among persons who might
give her quite a false idea of the English, and a dislike to the
country.

"There is no danger of that sort," he replied. "Had she been disposed to
judge so rashly and uncharitably, the humane and polite attentions she
met with last night from a gentleman who was an utter stranger to her,
and who could only know that she was a foreigner in want of assistance,
must have been to her at once conviction and reproof." (I bowed,
delighted with Mr. Montenero and with myself.) "But I hope and believe,"
continued he, "that my Berenice is not disposed to form uncharitable
judgments either of individuals or nations; especially not of the
English, of whom she has, from their history and literature, with which
we are not wholly unacquainted, conceived the highest ideas." I bowed
again, though not quite so much delighted with this general compliment
to my nation as by that peculiar to myself. I expressed my hopes that
the English would justify this favourable prepossession, and that on
farther acquaintance with different societies in London, Mr. and Miss
Montenero would find, that among the higher classes in this country
there is no want of liberality of opinion, and certainly no want of
delicacy of sentiment and manner--no want of attention to the feelings
of those who are of a different persuasion from ourselves. Just at this
moment my mother entered the room. Advancing towards Mr. Montenero, she
said, with a gracious smile, "You need not introduce us to each other,
my dear Harrington, for I am sure that I have the pleasure of seeing Mr.
Clive, from India."

"Mr. Montenero, from America, ma'am."

"Mr. Montenero! I am happy to have the honour--the pleasure--I am very
happy--"

My mother's politeness struggled against truth; but whilst I feared that
Mr. Montenero's penetration would discern that there was no pleasure
in the honour, a polite inquiry followed concerning Miss Montenero's
indisposition. Then, after an ineffectual effort to resume the ease and
cordiality of her manner, my mother leaned back languidly on the sofa,
and endeavoured to account for the cloud which settled on her brow by
adverting to the sleepless night she had passed, and to the fears of an
impending headache; assuring Mr. Montenero at the same time that society
and conversation were always of service to her. I was particularly
anxious to detain, and to draw him out before my mother, because I felt
persuaded that his politeness of manner, and his style of conversation,
would counteract any _presentiment_ or prejudice she had conceived
against him and his race. He seemed to lend himself to my views, and
with benevolent politeness exerted himself to entertain my mother. A Don
Quixote was on the table, in which there were some good prints, and from
these he took occasion to give us many amusing and interesting accounts
of Spain, where he had passed the early part of his life. From Don
Quixote to Gil Blas--to the Duc de Lerma--to the tower of Segovia--to
the Inquisition--to the Spanish palaces and Moorish antiquities, he let
me lead him backwards and forwards as I pleased. My mother was very fond
of some of the old Spanish ballads and Moorish romances: I led to the
_Rio Verde_, and the fair Zaida, and the Moor Alcanzor, with whom both
in their Moorish and English dress Mr. Montenero was well acquainted,
and of whom he was enthusiastically fond.

My mother was fond of painting: I asked some questions concerning the
Spanish painters, particularly about Murillo; of one of his pictures
we had a copy, and my mother had often wished to see the original. Mr.
Montenero said he was happy in having it in his power to gratify her
wish; he possessed the original of this picture. But few of Murillo's
paintings had at this time found their way out of Spain; national and
regal pride had preserved them with jealous care; but Mr. Montenero
had inherited some of Murillo's master-pieces. These, and a small but
valuable collection of pictures which he had been many years in forming,
were now in England: they were not yet arranged as he could wish, but
an apartment was preparing for them; and in the mean time, he should
be happy to have the honour of showing them to us and to any of our
friends. He particularly addressed himself to my mother; she replied in
those general terms of acquiescence and gratitude, which are used when
there is no real intention to accept an invitation, but yet a wish to
avoid such an absolute refusal as should appear ill-bred. I, on the
contrary, sincerely eager to accept the offered favour, fixed instantly
the time, and the soonest possible. I named the next day at one o'clock.
Mr. Montenero then took his leave, and as the door closed after him, I
stood before my mother, as if waiting for judgment; she was silent.

"Don't you think him agreeable, ma'am?"

"Very agreeable."

"I knew you would think so, my dear mother; an uncommonly agreeable
man."

"But--"

"But what, ma'am?"

"But so much the worse."

"How so, ma'am? Because he is a Jew, is he forbidden to be agreeable?"
said I, smiling.

"Pray be serious, Harrington--I say the more agreeable this man is, the
better his manner, the more extensive his information, the higher the
abilities he possesses, the greater are his means of doing mischief." "A
conclusive argument," said. I, "against the possession of good manners,
information, abilities, and every agreeable and useful quality! and an
argument equally applicable to Jews and Christians."

"Argument!" repeated my mother: "I know, my dear, I am not capable
of arguing with you--indeed I am not fond of arguments, they are so
unfeminine: I seldom presume to give even my opinion, except on subjects
of sentiment and feeling; there ladies may venture, I suppose, to have
a voice as well as gentlemen, perhaps better, sometimes. In the present
case, it may be very ridiculous; but I own that, notwithstanding this
Mr. Montenero is what you'd call an uncommonly agreeable man, there is
a something about him--in short, I feel something like an antipathy
to him--and in the whole course of my life I have never been misled by
these _antipathies_. I don't say they are reasonable, I only say that
I can't help feeling them; and if they never mislead us, you know
they have all the force of instincts, and in some cases instincts are
superior even to that reason of which man is so proud."

I did not advert to the _if_, on which this whole reasoning rested, but
I begged my mother would put herself out of the question for one moment,
and consider to what injustice and intolerance such antipathies would
lead in society.

"Perhaps in general it might be so," she said; "but in this particular
instance she was persuaded she was right and _correct_; and after all,
is there a human being living who is not influenced at first sight by
countenance! Does not Lavater say that even a cockchafer and a dish of
tea have a physiognomy?"

I could not go quite so far as to admit the cockchafer's physiognomy in
our judgment of characters. "But then, ma'am," concluded I, "before we
can judge, before we can decide, we should see what is called the play
of the countenance--we should see the working of the muscles. Now, for
instance, when we have seen Mr. Montenero two or three times, when we
have studied the muscles of his countenance--"

"I! I study the muscles of the man's countenance!" interrupted my
mother, indignantly; "I never desire to see him or his muscles again!
Jew, Turk, or _Mussulman_, let me hear no more about him. Seriously, my
dear Harrington, this is the subject on which I wished to speak to you
this morning, to warn you from forming this dangerous acquaintance.
I dreamed last night--but I know you won't listen to dreams; I have a
_presentiment_--but you have no faith in _presentiments_: what shall I
say to you?--Oh! my dear Harrington, I appeal to your own heart--your
own feelings, your own conscience, must tell you all I at this moment
foresee and dread. Oh! with your ardent, too ardent imagination--your
susceptibility! Surely, surely, there is an absolute fatality in these
things! At the very moment I was preparing to warn you, Mr. Montenero
appears, and strengthens the dangerous impression. And after all the
pains I took to prevent your ever meeting, is it not extraordinary that
you should meet his daughter at the playhouse? Promise me, I conjure
you," cried she, turning and seizing both my hands, "promise me, my dear
son, that you will see no more of this Jew and Jewess."

It was a promise I could not, would not make:--some morning visitors
came in and relieved me. My mother's imagination was as vivacious, but
not as tenacious as my own. There was in her a feminine mobility, which,
to my masculine strength of passion, and consequent tenacity of purpose,
appeared often inconceivable, and sometimes provoking. In a few minutes
her fancy turned to old china and new lace, and all the fears which had
so possessed and agitated her mind subsided.

Among the crowd of morning visitors, Lady Anne Mowbray ran in and
ran out; fortunately she could not stay one minute, and still more
fortunately my mother did not hear a word she said, or even see her
ladyship's exit and entrance, so many ladies had encompassed my
mother's sofa, displaying charming bargains of French lace. The subject
abstracted their attention, and engrossed all their faculties. Lady Anne
had just called to tell me a secret, that her mother had been saying
all the morning to every body, how odd it was of Mr. Harrington to take
notice whether a Jewess fainted or not. Lady Anne said, for her part,
she had taken my part; she did not think it _so_ odd of me, but she
thought it odd and ridiculous of the Jewess to faint about Shylock. But
the reason she called was, because she was dying with curiosity to know
if I had heard any more about the Jewess. Was she an heiress or not? I
must find out and tell: she had heard--but she could not stay now--going
to ride in the park.

I had often observed that my mother's _presentiments_ varied from day
to day, according to the state of her nerves, or of some slight external
circumstances. I was extremely anxious to prevail upon her to accompany
me to see the Spanish pictures, and I therefore put off my visit for
a day, when I found my mother had engaged herself to attend a party of
fair encouragers of smugglers to a cheap French lace shop. I wrote an
apology to Mr. Montenero, and Heaven knows how much it cost me. But
my heroic patience was of no avail; I could not persuade my mother to
accompany me. To all her former feelings, the pride of opinion and the
jealousy of maternal affection were now added; she was piqued to prove
herself in the right, and vexed to see that, right or wrong, I would not
yield to her entreaties. I thought I acted solely from the dictates of
pure reason and enlightened philanthropy.



CHAPTER 9

Mowbray was curious, he said, to know how the Jewess would look by
daylight, and he begged that he might accompany me to see the pictures.
As I had told him that I had permission to take with me any of my
friends, I could not refuse his request, though I must own that I would
rather have gone without him. I was a little afraid of his raillery, and
of the quickness of his observation. During our walk, however, he with
address--with that most irresistible kind of address, which assumes
an air of perfect frankness and cordiality, contrived to dissipate my
feelings of embarrassment; and by the time we got to Mr. Montenero's
door, I rejoiced that I had with me a friend and supporter.

"A handsome house--a splendid house, this," said Mowbray, looking up
at the front, as we waited for admission. "If the inside agree with the
out, faith, Harrington, your Jewish heiress will soon be heard of
on 'Change, and at court too, you'll see. Make haste and secure your
interest in her, I advise you."

To our great disappointment the servant told us that neither Mr. nor
Miss Montenero was at home. But orders had been left with a young man
of his to attend me and my company. At this moment I heard a well-known
voice on the stairs, and Jacob, poor Jacob, appeared: joy flashed in
his face at the sight of me; he flew down stairs, and across the hall,
exclaiming, "It is--it is my own good Mr. Harrington!"

But he started back at the sight of Mowbray, and his whole countenance
and manner changed. In an embarrassed voice, he began to explain why
Mr. Montenero was not at home; that he had waited yesterday in hopes of
seeing me at the appointed time, till my note of apology had arrived.
I had not positively named any day for my visit, and Mr. Montenero had
particular business that obliged him to go out this morning, but that he
would be back in an hour: "Meantime, sir, as Mr. Montenero has desired,"
said Jacob, "I shall have the honour of showing the pictures to you and
your friend."

It was not till he came to the words _your friend_, that Jacob
recollected to bow to Lord Mowbray, and even then it was a stiff-necked
bow. Mowbray, contrary to his usual assurance, looked a little
embarrassed, yet spoke to Jacob as to an old acquaintance.

Jacob led us through several handsome, I might say splendid, apartments,
to the picture-room.

"Good! Good!" whispered Mowbray, as we went along, till the moment
we entered the picture-room; then making a sudden stop, and start of
recollection, and pulling out his watch, he declared that he had till
that minute forgotten an indispensable engagement--that he must come
some other day to see these charming pictures. He begged that I would
settle that for him--he was excessively sorry, but go he must--and off
he went immediately.

The instant he was out of sight, Jacob seemed relieved from the
disagreeable constraint under which he laboured, and his delight was
manifest when he had me to himself. I conceived that Jacob still
felt resentment against Mowbray, for the old quarrel at school. I was
surprised at this, and in my own mind I blamed Jacob.

I have always found it the best way to speak openly, and to go to the
bottom of mysteries and quarrels at once: so turning to Jacob, I asked
him, whether, in right of our former acquaintance, I might speak to him
with the freedom of one who heartily wished him well? The tears came
into his eyes, and he could only say, "Speak, pray--and thank you, sir."

"Then, Jacob," said I, "I thought you could not for such a number of
years bear malice for a schoolboy's offence; and yet your manner just
now to Lord Mowbray--am I mistaken?--set me right, if I am--did I
misinterpret your manner, Jacob?"

"No, sir," said he, looking up in my face, with his genuine expression
of simplicity and openness; "no, sir, you do not mistake, nor
misinterpret Jacob's manner; you know him too well, and his manner tells
too plainly; you do not misinterpret the feeling, but you mistake the
cause; and since you are so kind as to desire me to set you right, I
will do so; but it is too long a story to tell while you are standing."

"Not at all--I am interested--go on."

"I should not," said Jacob, "be worthy of this interest--this regard,
which it is joy to my very heart to see that you still feel for me--I
should not be worthy in the least of it, if I could bear malice so many
years for a schoolboy's offence.

"No, Mr. Harrington, the schoolboy young lord is forgotten. But long
since that time, since this young lord has been grown into a man, and an
officer--at Gibraltar--"

The recollection of whatever it was that happened at Gibraltar seemed to
come at this instant so full upon Jacob's feelings, that he could not go
on. He took up his story farther back. He reminded me of the time when
we had parted at Cambridge; he was then preparing to go to Gibraltar,
to assist in keeping a store there, for the brother and partner of
his friend and benefactor, the London jeweller, Mr. Manessa, who had
ventured a very considerable part of his fortune upon this speculation.

About that time many Jews had enriched themselves at Gibraltar, by
keeping stores for the troops; and during the siege it was expected that
it would be a profitable business. Mr. Manessa's store under Jacob's
care went on prosperously till the day when Lord Mowbray arrived at
Gibraltar with a regiment, of which, young as he was, he had been
appointed lieutenant-colonel: "He recognized me the first time we met;
I saw he was grown into a fine-looking officer; and indeed, Mr.
Harrington, I saw him, without bearing the least malice for any little
things that had passed, which I thought, as you say, were only schoolboy
follies. But in a few minutes I found, to my sorrow, that he was not
changed in mind towards me.

"His first words at meeting me in the public streets were, 'So! are
you here, _young Shylock?_ What brings you to Gibraltar? You are of the
tribe of Gad, I think, _thou Wandering Jew!_'

"Lord Mowbray's servants heard, and caught their lord's witticism: the
serjeants and soldiers repeated the colonel's words, and the nicknames
spread through the regiment, and through the garrison; wherever I
turned, I heard them echoed: poor Jacob was called _young Shylock_ by
some, and by others the _Wandering Jew_. It was a bitter jest, and soon
became bitter earnest.

"The ignorant soldiers really believed me to be that Jew whom Christians
most abominate. [Footnote: See Percy's Reliques of Ancient Poetry, for
the ballad of the Wandering Jew.]

"The common people felt a superstitious dread of me: the mothers charged
their children to keep out of my way; and if I met them in the streets,
they ran away and hid themselves.

"You may think, sir, I was not happy. I grew melancholy; and my
melancholy countenance, they said, was a proof that I was what I was
said to be. I was ashamed to show my face. I lost all relish for my
food, and began to pine away. My master noticed it, and he was sorry
for me; he took my part, and spoke to the young lord, who thereupon grew
angry, and high words passed; the young lord cursed at my master for an
insolent Jew dog. As to me, his lordship swore that he knew me from a
boy; that he had known enough of my tricks, and that of course for that
I must bear him malice; and he vowed I should not bear it to him for
nothing.

"From that day there was a party raised against us in the garrison. Lord
Mowbray's soldiers of course took his part; and those who were most
his favourites abused us the most. They never passed our store any day
without taunt and insult; ever repeating the names their colonel had
given me. It was hard to stand still and mute, and bear every thing,
without reply. But I was determined not to bring my master into any
quarrel, so I bore all. Presently the time came when there was great
distress for provisions in the garrison; then the cry against the Jews
was terrible: but I do not wish to say more of what followed than is
necessary to my own story. You must have heard, sir, of the riot at
Gibraltar, the night when the soldiery broke into the spirit stores?"

I had read accounts of some such thing in the newspapers of the day;
I had heard of excesses committed by the soldiery, who were enraged
against the Jew merchants; and I recollected some story [Footnote:
Drinkwater's Siege of Gibraltar.] of the soldiers having roasted a pig
before a Jew's door, with a fire made of the Jew's own cinnamon.

"That fire, sir," said Jacob, "was made before our door: it was kindled
by a party of Lord Mowbray's soldiers, who, madly intoxicated with
the spirits they had taken from the stores, came in the middle of that
dreadful night to our house, and with horrible shouts, called upon my
master to give up to them the _Wandering Jew_. My master refusing to do
this, they burst open his house, pillaged, wasted, destroyed, and burnt
all before our eyes! We lost every thing! I do not mean to say _we--I_,
poor Jacob, had little to lose. It is not of that, though it was my all,
it is not of that I speak--but my master! From a rich man in one hour he
became a beggar! The fruit of all his labour lost--nothing left for
his wife or children! I never can forget his face of despair by that
fire-light. I think I see it now! He did not recover it, sir,--he died
of a broken heart. He was the best and kindest of masters to me. And can
you wonder now, Mr. Harrington, or do you blame Jacob, that he could
not look upon that lord with a pleased eye, nor smile when he saw him
again?"

I did not blame Jacob--I liked him for the warmth of his feeling for his
master. When he was a little composed, however, I represented that his
affection and pity might have raised his indignation too strongly,
and might have made him impute to Lord Mowbray a greater share than he
really had in their misfortunes. Lord Mowbray was a very young officer
at that time, too young to be trusted with the command of men in such
difficult circumstances. His lordship had been exceedingly blamable in
giving, even in jest, the nicknames which had prejudiced his soldiers
against an innocent individual; but I could not conceive that he had a
serious design to injure; nor could he, as I observed, possibly foresee
the fatal consequences that afterwards ensued. As to the excesses of
his soldiers, for their want of discipline he was answerable; but Jacob
should recollect the distress to which the soldiers had been previously
reduced, and the general prejudice against those who were supposed to be
the cause of the scarcity. Lord Mowbray might be mistaken like others;
but as to his permitting their outrages, or directing them against
individual Jews whom he disliked, I told Jacob it was impossible for me
to believe it. Why did not the Jew merchant state his complaint to the
general, who had, as Jacob allowed, punished all the soldiers who
had been convicted of committing outrages? If Lord Mowbray had been
complained of by Mr. Manessa, a court-martial would have been held;
and if the charges had been substantiated, his title of colonel or lord
would have availed him nothing--he would have been broke. Jacob
said, his poor master, who was ruined and in despair, thought not of
courts-martial--perhaps he had no legal proofs--perhaps he dreaded, with
reason, the popular prejudice in the garrison, and dared not, being a
Jew, appear against a Christian officer. How that might have been, Jacob
said, he did not know--all he knew was that his master was very ill, and
that he returned to England soon afterwards.

But still, argued I, if Lord Mowbray had not been brought to a
court-martial, if it had been known among his brother officers that he
had been guilty of such unofficer-like conduct, no British officer would
have kept company with him. I was therefore convinced that Jacob
must have been misinformed and deceived by exaggerated reports, and
prejudiced by the warmth of his own feelings for the loss of his master.
Jacob listened to me with a look of incredulity, yet as if with a wish
to believe that I was right: he softened gradually--he struggled with
his feelings.

"He knew," he said, "that it was our Christian precept to forgive our
enemies--a very good precept: but was it easy? Did all Christians find
it easy to put it in practice? And you, Mr. Harrington, you who can have
no enemies, how can you judge?"

Jacob ended by promising, with a smile, that he would show me that a Jew
could forgive.

Then, eager to discard the subject, he spoke of other things. I thanked
him for his having introduced me to Mr. Israel Lyons:--he was delighted
to hear of the advantage I had derived from this introduction at
Cambridge, and of its having led to my acquaintance with Mr. Montenero.

He had been informed of my meeting Miss Montenero at the theatre: and
he told me of his hopes and fears when he heard her say she had been
assisted by a gentleman of the name of Harrington.

I did not venture, however, to speak much of Miss Montenero; but I
expatiated on the pleasure I had in Mr. Montenero's conversation, and on
the advantages I hoped to derive from cultivating his society.

Jacob, always more disposed to affection and gratitude than to suspicion
or revenge, seemed happy to be relieved from the thoughts of Lord
Mowbray, and he appeared inspired with fresh life and spirit when he
talked of Mr. Montenero and his daughter. He mentioned their kindness
to the widow and children of his deceased master, and of Mr. Montenero's
goodness to the surviving brother and partner, the London jeweller,
Mr. Manessa, Jacob's first benefactor. The Manessas had formerly been
settled in Spain, at the time Mr. Montenero had lived there; and when
he was in some difficulties with the Inquisition, they had in some
way essentially served him, either in assisting his escape from that
country, or in transmitting his property. Jacob was not acquainted with
the particulars, but he knew that Mr. Montenero was most grateful for
the obligation, whatever it had been; and now that he was rich and the
Manessas in distress, he seemed to think he could never do enough for
them. Jacob became first acquainted, as he told me, with Mr. Montenero
in consequence of his connexion with this family. The widow had
represented him as being a faithful friend, and the two children of
his deceased master were fond of him. Mr. Montenero's attachment to the
Manessas immediately made him take notice of Jacob. Jacob told me that
he was to go to their house in the city, and to take charge of their
affairs, as soon as they could be settled; and that Mr. Montenero
had promised if possible to obtain for him a share in the firm of the
surviving brother and partner. In the mean time Jacob was employed
by Mr. Montenero in making out catalogues of his books and pictures,
arranging his library and cabinet of medals, &c., to all which he was
fully competent. Jacob said he rejoiced that these occupations would
keep him a little while longer at Mr. Montenero's, as he should there
have more frequent opportunities of seeing me, than he could hope for
when he should be at the other end of the town. "Besides," added he,
"I don't know how I shall ever be able to do without the kindness Mr.
Montenero shows me; and as for Miss Montenero--!" Jacob's countenance
expanded, and his voice was by turns softened into tenderness, and
raised to enthusiasm, as he again spoke of the father and daughter:
and when my mind was touched and warmed by his panegyric of
Berenice--pronounced with the true eloquence of the heart--she, leaning
on her father's arm, entered the room. The dignified simplicity,
the graceful modesty of her appearance, so unlike the fashionable
forwardness or the fashionable bashfulness, or any of the various airs
of affectation, which I had seen in Lady Anne Mowbray and her class of
young ladies, charmed me perhaps the more from contrast and from the
novelty of the charm. There was a timid sensibility in her countenance
when I spoke to her, which joined to the feminine reserve of her whole
manner, the tone of her voice, and the propriety and elegance of the
very little she said, pleased me inexpressibly. I wished only that she
had said more. However, when her father spoke, it seemed to be almost
the same as if she spoke herself--her sympathy with him appeared so
strongly. He began by speaking of Jacob: he was glad to find that I was
_the_ Mr. Harrington whom Jacob had been so eager to see. It was evident
that they knew all the good that grateful young man could tell of me;
and the smile which I received from the father and daughter at this
instant would have overpaid me for any obligations I could have
conferred. Jacob retired, observing that he had taken up all the time
with the history of his own private affairs, and that I had not yet
seen any of the pictures. Mr. Montenero immediately led me to one of
Murillo's, regretting that he had not the pleasure of showing it to my
mother. I began to speak of her sorrow at not being able to venture out;
I made some apology, but whatever it was, I am sure I did not, I could
not, pronounce it well. Mr. Montenero bowed his head courteously,
removed his eyes from my face, and glanced for one moment at Miss
Montenero with a look of regret, quickly succeeded by an expression in
his countenance of calm and proud independence. He was sorry, he
said, that he could not have the honour of seeing Mrs. Harrington--the
pleasure of presenting his daughter to her.

I perceived that he was aware of what I had hoped had escaped his
penetration--my mother's prepossession against him and his daughter. I
saw that he attributed it to a general prejudice against his race and
religion, and I perceived that this hurt his feelings much, though his
pride or his philosophy quickly repressed his sensibility. He never
afterwards spoke of my mother--never hoped to see her another day--nor
hoped even that the cold, which had prevented her from venturing out,
would be better. I was the more vexed and ashamed that I had not been
able to bring my mother with me. I turned the conversation as quickly as
I could to Mr. Israel Lyons.

I observed, by what Mr. Montenero said, that from the information he had
received from Mr. Lyons and from Jacob, he was thoroughly aware of my
early prejudices and antipathy to the Jews. He observed to his daughter,
that Mr. Harrington had double merit in his present liberality, since he
had conquered what it is so difficult, scarcely possible, completely to
conquer--an early prepossession, fostered perhaps by the opinion of many
who must have had great influence on his mind. Through this compliment,
I thought I saw in Mr. Montenero's, and still more in the timid
countenance of his daughter, a fear that I might relapse; and that
_these early prepossessions, which were so difficult, scarcely possible,
completely to conquer_, might recur. I promised myself that I should
soon convince them they were mistaken, if they had formed any such
notion, and I was flattered by the fear, as it implied that I had
inspired some interest. We went on with the pictures. Not being a
connoisseur, though fond of the arts, I was relieved and pleased to find
that Mr. Montenero had none of the jargon of connoisseurship: while his
observations impressed me with a high idea of his taste and judgment,
they gave me some confidence in my own. I was delighted to find that I
understood, and could naturally and truly agree with all he said, and
that my untutored preferences were what they ought to be, according to
the right rules of art and science. In short, I was proud to find that
my taste was in general the same as his and his daughter's. What pleased
me far more than Mr. Montenero's taste, was the liberality and the
enlargement of mind I saw in all his opinions and sentiments. There was
in him a philosophic calmness and moderation; his reason seemed to have
worked against great natural sensibility, perhaps susceptibility, till
this calm had become the unvarying temper of his mind. I fancied, also,
that I perceived a constant care in him to cultivate the same temper in
his daughter, and to fortify her against that extreme sensibility to
the opinion of others, and that diffidence of herself, to which, as I
recollected, he had formerly adverted.

After having admired some of Murillo's pictures, we came to one which I,
unpractised as I was in judging of painting, immediately perceived to be
inferior.

"You are quite right," said Mr. Montenero; "it is inferior to Murillo,
and the sudden sense of this inferiority absolutely broke the painter's
heart. This picture is by a painter of the name of Castillo, who had
thought comfortably well of himself, till he saw the master-pieces
of Murillo's genius; Castillo surveyed them for some time in absolute
silence, then turning away, exclaimed _Castillo is no more!_ and soon
Castillo was no more. From that moment he pined away, and shortly
afterwards died: not from envy," continued Mr. Montenero; "no, he was a
man of mild, amiable temper, incapable of envy; but he fell a victim
to excessive sensibility--a dangerous, though not a common vice of
character."

"Weakness, not vice, I hope," I heard Miss Montenero say in a low voice.

The father answered with a sigh, "_that_, however, cannot be called a
virtue, which incapacitates from the exercise of independent virtue, and
which, as you find, not only depresses genius, but may extinguish life
itself."

Mr. Montenero then turned to me, and with composure went on speaking of
the pictures. Ever since I knew I was to see these, I had been studying
Cumberland's Lives of the Spanish Painters, and this I honestly told
Mr. Montenero, when he complimented me upon my knowing all the names and
anecdotes to which he alluded: he smiled--so did his daughter; and he
was so good as to say that he liked me better for telling him this
so candidly, than if I had known all that the connoisseurs and
anecdote-mongers, living or dead, had ever said or written. We came to
a picture by Alonzo Cano, who, excelling in architecture, statuary, and
painting, has been called the Michael Angelo of Spain.

"He at least was not deficient in a comfortably good opinion of himself,
Mr. Montenero," said I. "Is not it recorded of Cano, that having
finished a statue of Saint Antonio de Padua for a Spanish counsellor,
the tasteless lawyer and niggardly devotee hesitated to pay the artist
his price, observing that Cano, by his own account, had been only
twenty-five days about it? The counsellor sat down, with stupid
self-sufficiency, to calculate, that at a hundred pistoles, divided by
twenty-five days, the artist would be paid at a higher rate than he was
himself for the exercise of his talents. 'Wretch! talk to me of your
talents!' exclaimed the enraged artist; 'I have been fifty years
learning to make this statue in twenty-five days!' And as he spoke,
Cano dashed his statue to pieces on the pavement of the academy. The
affrighted counsellor fled from the house with the utmost precipitation,
concluding that the man who was bold enough to destroy a saint, would
have very little remorse in destroying a lawyer.

"Happily for Cano, this story did not reach the ears of the
Inquisition," said Mr. Montenero, "or he would have been burnt alive."

Mr. Montenero then pointed out some exquisite pieces by this artist, and
spoke with enthusiasm of his genius. I perceived some emotion, of which
I could not guess the cause, in the countenance of his daughter;
she seemed touched by what her father said about this painter or his
pictures.

Mr. Montenero concluded his panegyric on Cano's genius by saying,
"Besides being a great genius, we are told that he was very religious,
and, some few peculiarities excepted, very charitable."

"You are very charitable, I am sure," said Miss Montenero, looking at
her father, and smiling: "I am not sure that I could speak so charitably
of that man." A sigh quickly followed her smile, and I now recollected
having heard or read that this painter bore such an antipathy to the
Jews, that he considered every touch of theirs as contamination; and, if
he accidentally came in contact with them, would cast off and give away
his clothes, forbidding the servant to whom he gave them, on any account
to wear them.

Miss Montenero saw that I recollected to what she alluded--that I had
a just feeling of the benevolent magnanimity of her father's character.
This raised me, I perceived, in the daughter's opinion. Though scarcely
a word passed at the moment, yet I fancied that we felt immediately
better acquainted. I ventured to go and stand beside her, from doing
which I had hitherto been prevented by I know not what insurmountable
difficulty or strange spell.

We were both opposite to a Spanish copy of Guido's Aurora Surgens.
I observed that the flame of the torch borne by the winged boy,
representing Lucifer, points westward, in a direction contrary to that
in which the manes of the horses, the drapery of Apollo, and that of the
dancing Hours, are blown, which seemed to me to be a mistake.

Berenice said that Guido had taken this picture from Ovid's description,
and that he had, with great art, represented, by the very circumstance
to which I objected, the swiftness of the motion with which the chariot
was driven forward. The current of the morning wind blowing from the
east was represented by the direction of the hair of Lucifer, and of the
flame of his torch; while the rapidity of the motion of the chariot was
such, that, notwithstanding the eastern wind, which would otherwise have
blown them towards the west, the manes of the horses, and the drapery of
the figures, were driven backwards, by the resistance of the air against
which they were hurried. She then repeated, in a pleasing but timid
manner, in support of her opinion, these two beautiful lines of
Addison's translation:

    "With winged speed outstrips the eastern wind,
    And leaves the breezes of the morn behind."

I need not say that I was delighted with this criticism, and with the
modest manner in which it was spoken: but I could not honestly help
remarking that, to the description immediately alluded to in Ovid,
Addison had added the second beautiful line,

  "And leaves the breezes of the morn behind."

Mr. Montenero looked pleased, and said to me, "It is very true, in the
immediate passage describing the chariot of the Sun issuing from the
gates of Heaven, this line is not in the original; but if you look
further back in the fable, you will find that the idea is still more
strongly expressed in the Latin than in the English."

It was with the utmost difficulty that I at last forced myself away, nor
was I in the least aware of the unconscionable length of my visit. What
particularly pleased me in the conversation of Miss Montenero was, that
she had none of those fashionable phrases which fill each vacuity of
sense, and which level all distinctions of understanding. There was none
of that commonplace stuff which passes for conversation in the world,
and which we hear and repeat till we are equally tired of others and of
ourselves.

There were, besides, in her manner and countenance, indications of
perfect sweetness of temper, a sort of feminine gentleness and softness
which art cannot feign nor affectation counterfeit; a gentleness which,
while it is the charm of female manners, is perfectly consistent with
true spirit, and with the higher or the stronger qualities of the mind.
All I had seen of Miss Montenero in this first visit inspired me with
the most ardent desire to see more. Here was a woman who could fill my
whole soul; who could at once touch my heart and my imagination. I felt
inspired with new life--I had now a great object, a strong and lively
interest in existence. At parting, Mr. Montenero shook hands with me,
which, he said, he knew was the English mode of showing kindness: he
expressed an earnest, but proudly guarded wish, that I might be _so
circumstanced_, and so inclined, as to allow him the pleasure he much
desired, of cultivating my acquaintance.



CHAPTER 10

The interest which Berenice inspired, so completely absorbed my mind,
that I never thought again of Jacob and his story, till I met Lady Anne
and her brother the next morning, when I went to take a ride in the
park: they were with Colonel Topham, and some people of her ladyship's
acquaintance.

Lady Anne, after the usual preliminary quantity of nonsense, and after
she had questioned and cross-questioned me, to the best of her slender
abilities, about the Jewess, told me a long story about herself, and her
fears, and the fears of her mare, and a horse-laugh of Mowbray's which
Colonel Topham said no horse could stand: not much applause ensuing
from me, she returned to the witty colonel, and left me to her brother.
Mowbray directly began to talk about Jacob. He said he supposed Jacob
had not failed to make his Gibraltar story good; but that "Hear both
sides" was an indispensable maxim, even where such a favourite as Jacob
was concerned. "But first let us take one other good gallop," said
Mowbray; "Anne, I leave you here with Mrs. Carrill and Colonel Topham;"
and away he galloped. When he thought, as he said, that he had shaken
off some of my prejudices, he drew up his horse, and talked over the
Gibraltar affair.

His dashing, jocular, military mode of telling the thing, so different
from Jacob's plain, mercantile, matter-of-fact method, quite changed my
view and opinion of the transaction. Mowbray blamed himself with such a
good grace, and wished so fervently that he could make any reparation to
"the poor devils who had suffered," that I acquitted him of all malice,
and forgave his imprudence.

The frankness with which he spoke to Jacob, when they met, was proof
conclusive to me that he was incapable, as he declared, of harbouring
any malice against Jew or Christian. He inquired most particularly into
Jacob's own losses at Gibraltar, called for pen, ink, and paper, and in
his off-hand manner wrote a draft on his banker, and put it into Jacob's
hand. "Here, my honest Jacob, you are a Jew whose accounts I can take
at your word. Let this settle the balance between us. No scruples,
Jacob--no present, this--nothing but remuneration for your losses."

Jacob accepted Lord Mowbray's apologies, but could not by any means be
prevailed upon to accept from him any present or remuneration. He
seemed willing to forgive, but not to trust Lord Mowbray. All trace of
resentment was cleared from his countenance, but no condescension of
his lordship could move Jacob to throw off his reserve beyond a certain
point. He conquered aversion, but he would not pretend to like. Mr.
Montenero came into the room while we were speaking, and I presented
Lord Mowbray to him. There was as marked a difference as politeness
would allow in Mr. Montenero's manner towards his lordship and towards
me, which I justly attributed to Jacob's previous representations. We
looked at the pictures, and talked, and loitered, but I turned my eyes
in vain to the door every time it opened--no Miss Montenero appeared.
I was so much preoccupied with my object that I was silent, and left
Mowbray to make his own way, which no one was more capable of doing. In
a few minutes he was in full conversation. He went over again, without
my attending to it, his _pice justificative_ about the riot at
Gibraltar, and Jacob, and the Manessas; and between the fits of my
reverie, I perceived Mowbray was talking of the Due de Crillon and
General Elliot, and red-hot balls; but I took no interest in the
conversation, till I heard him speak of an officers' ball at Gibraltar,
and of dancing with a Jewess. The very night he had first landed at
Gibraltar, there happened to be a ball to which he went with a friend,
who was also just landed, and a stranger. It was the custom to draw lots
for partners. His friend, a true-born Englishman, took fright at the
foreign-sounding name of the lady who fell to his lot--Mowbray changed
tickets with him, and had, he said, great reason to rejoice. The lady
with the foreign name was a Jewess, the handsomest, the most graceful,
the most agreeable woman in the room. He was the envy of every man,
and especially of his poor friend, who too late repented his rash
renunciation of his ticket. Lord Mowbray, by several other slight
anecdotes, which he introduced with happy effect, contrived to please
Mr. Montenero; and if any unfavourable prepossession had existed against
him, it was, I thought, completely removed. For my own part, I was
delighted with his presence of mind in recollecting all that was best
worth seeing in London, and arranging parties in which we could have the
honour of attending Miss Montenero, and the pleasure of being of some
use to her.

Mr. Montenero's own acquaintance in London was chiefly with the families
of some of the foreign ambassadors, and with other foreigners of
distinction; but his daughter was not yet acquainted with any English
ladies, except the lady of General B----, with whom the Monteneros had
been intimate in America. Lady Emily B---- was detained in the country
by the illness of one of her family, and Miss Montenero, having declined
going into public with Mrs. Coates, would wait quietly at home till
her English friends should come to town. Again shame for my mother's
remissness obliged me to cast down my eyes in awkward silence. But
Mowbray, Heaven bless him for it! went on fluently. This was the moment,
he said, before Miss Montenero should appear in public, and get into the
whirl of the great world, before engagements should multiply and
press upon her, as inevitably they would as soon as she had made her
dbut--this was the moment, and the only moment probably she would
ever have to herself, to see all that was worth a stranger's notice in
London. Mr. Montenero was obliged to Mowbray, and I am sure so was I.

Miss Montenero, infinitely more desirous to see than to be seen, was
pleased with the parties we arranged for her and from this time forward,
scarcely a day passed without our having the pleasure of attending
the father and daughter. My mother sighed and remonstrated in vain; my
father, absorbed in the House of Commons, was satisfied with seeing me
regularly at breakfast. He usually dined at clubs, and it was happily
his principle to let his son amuse himself his own way. But I assured
her, and truly, that I was only amusing myself, and that I had not
formed any serious intentions. I wished to see more of the lady.
Mowbray, with ready invention, continually suggested something
particularly well worth seeing or hearing, some delightful pretext for
our being together. Sometimes he accompanied us, sometimes he
excused himself--he had indispensable engagements. His _indispensable
engagements_ I knew were usually with ladies of a very different sort
from Miss Montenero. Mowbray was desperately in love with the young
actress who had played the part of Jessica, and to her he devoted every
moment he could command. I regretted for his sake his dissipated
tastes, but I felt the more obliged to him for the time he sacrificed to
friendship; and perhaps, to tell things just as they were, I was glad he
was safely in love with a Jessica of his own, as it secured me from all
apprehension of his rivalling or wishing to rival me. Miss Montenero
he confessed was not in the least to his taste. In this instance I was
quite satisfied that our tastes should completely differ. I never
liked him so well--we went on most happily together. I felt uncommonly
benevolent towards the whole world; my heart expanded with increased
affection for all my friends--every thing seemed to smile upon me--even
the weather. The most delicious morning I ever remember was that on
which we rowed along the banks of the Thames with Miss Montenero. I
always enjoyed every beautiful object in nature with enthusiasm, but now
with new delight--with all the enchantment of a first love, and of hope
that had never known disappointment.

I was almost angry with my dear friend Mowbray, for not being as
enthusiastic this day as I was myself.

There were certain points of taste and character on which we never could
agree; my romantic imagination and enthusiastic manner of expressing
myself, were often in contrast with his worldly comic mode of seeing and
talking. He hurt, sometimes, my feelings by his raillery--he pulled me
down too suddenly from my flights of imagination. By the flashes of his
wit he showed, perhaps too clearly, the danger of my fall from "high
sublime to deep absurd;" but, after all, I was satisfied that Miss
Montenero preferred my style, and in general I was content that he
should enjoy his dear wit and gay rhetoric--even a little at my expense.

The morning we went to Westminster Abbey, I own I was provoked with him,
for pointing out to my observation, at the moment when my imagination
was struck with the sense of sublimity at the sight of the awful pile,
the ridiculous contrast of the showman and his keys, who was impatiently
waiting till I had finished my exclamations; but I soon forgot both the
showman and the wit, while at every step, among the illustrious dead,
my enthusiasm was raised, and some anecdote of their lives, or some
striking quotation from their works, rushed upon my mind. I was inspired
and encouraged by the approbation of the father, and the sympathy of the
daughter.

As we were quitting the Abbey, Mr. Montenero stopped, turned to me, and
said, "You have a great deal of enthusiasm, I see, Mr. Harrington: so
much the better, in my opinion--I love generous enthusiasm."

And at the moment I flattered myself that the eyes of his daughter
repeated "I love generous enthusiasm," her father caught the expression,
and immediately, with his usual care, moderated and limited what he had
said.

"Enthusiasm well governed, of course, I mean--as one of your English
noblemen lately said, 'There is an enthusiasm of the head, and that is
genius--there is an enthusiasm of the heart, and that is virtue--there
is an enthusiasm of the temper, and that is--'"

Miss Montenero looked uneasy, and her father perceiving this, checked
himself again, and, changing his tone, added, "But with all its dangers
and errors, enthusiasm, in either man or woman, is more amiable and
respectable than selfishness. Enthusiasm is not the vice of the young
men or women of the present day."

"Certainly not," said Mowbray, who was now very attentive to every thing
that passed. I forgave him the witticisms with which he had crossed my
humour this morning, for the kind sympathy he showed with the pleasure I
felt at this moment. Afterwards, when Mowbray and I were alone together,
and _compared notes_, as we were in the habit of doing, upon all
that had been said, and had been looked, during the day, Mowbray
congratulated me upon the impression I had made by my eloquence.
"Enthusiasm, you see, is the thing both with father and daughter: you
succeed in that line--follow it up!"

I was incapable of affecting enthusiasm, or of acting any part to show
myself off; yet Mowbray's opinion and my own observations coinciding,
unconsciously and involuntarily, I afterwards became more at my ease in
yielding to my natural feelings and habitual expressions.

Miss Montenero had not yet seen the Tower, and Mowbray engaged himself
to be of our party. But at the same time, he privately begged me to keep
it a dead secret from his sister. Lady Anne, he said, would never cease
to ridicule him, if she were to hear of his going to the Tower, after
having been too lazy to go with her, and all the fashionable world, the
night before, to the Fantoccini.

Though I had lived in London half my childhood, my nervous disease
had prevented my being taken to see even the sights that children are
usually shown; and since my late arrival in town, when I had been my own
master, engagements and emotions had pressed upon me too fast to leave
time or inclination to think of such things. My object, of course, was
now merely to have the pleasure of accompanying Berenice.

I was unexpectedly struck, on entering the armoury at the Tower. The
walls, three hundred feet in length, covered with arms for two hundred
thousand men, burnished arms, glittering in fancy figures on the walls,
and ranged in endless piles from the ceiling to the floor of that long
gallery; then the apartment with the line of ancient kings, clad
in complete armour, mounted on their steeds fully caparisoned--the
death-like stiffness of the figures--the stillness--the silence of the
place--altogether awe the imagination, and carry the memory back to the
days of chivalry. When among these forms of kings and heroes who had
ceased to be, I beheld the Black Prince, lance couched, vizor down, with
the arms he wore at Cressy and Poictiers, my enthusiasm knew no bounds.
The Black Prince, from my childhood, had been the object of my idolatry.
I kneeled--I am ashamed to confess it--to do homage to the empty armour.

Mr. Montenero, past the age of romantic extravagance, could not
sympathize with this enthusiasm, but he bore with it.

We passed on to dark Gothic nooks of chambers, where my reverence for
the beds on which kings had slept, and the tables at which kings had
sat, much increased by my early associations formed of Brantefield
Priory, was expressed with a vehemence which astonished Mr. Montenero;
and, I fear, prevented him from hearing the answers to various
inquiries, upon which he, with better regulated judgment, was intent.

An orator is the worst person to tell a plain fact; the very worst
guide, as Mowbray observed, that a foreigner can have. Still Mr.
Montenero had patience with me, and supplied the elisions in my
rhetoric, by what information he could pick up from the guide, and from
Mowbray, with whom, from time to time, he stopped to see and hear, after
I had passed on with Berenice. To her quickness and sympathy I flattered
myself that I was always intelligible.

We came at last to the chamber where Clarence and the young princes had
been murdered. Here, I am conscious, I was beyond measure exuberant in
exclamations, and in quotations from Shakspeare.

Mr. Montenero came in just as I was ranting, from Clarence's dream--

"Seize on him, furies! take him to your torments!-- With that,
methought, a legion of foul fiends Environ'd me, and howled in mine
ears" Such hideous cries! that with the very noise I made, I prevented
poor Mr. Montenero from hearing the answer to some historic question he
was asking. Berenice's eye warned me to lower my voice, and I believe
I should have been quiet, but that unluckily, Mowbray set me off in
another direction, by reminding me of the tapestry-chamber and
Sir Josseline. I remember covering my face with both my hands, and
shuddering with horror.

Mr. Montenero asked, "What of the tapestry-chamber?"

And immediately recollecting that I should not, to him, and before his
daughter, describe the Jew, who had committed a deed without a name,
I with much embarrassment said, that "it was nothing of any
consequence--it was something I could not explain."

I left it to Mowbray's superior presence of mind, and better address, to
account for it, and I went on with Berenice. Whenever my imagination was
warmed, verses poured in upon my memory, and often without much apparent
connexion with what went before. I recollected at this moment the
passage in Akenside's "Pleasures of the Imagination" describing the
early delight the imagination takes in horrors:--the children closing
round the village matron, who suspends the infant audience with her
tales breathing astonishment; and I recited all I recollected of

    "Evil spirits! of the deathbed call
    Of him who robb'd the widow, and devour'd
    The orphan's portion--of unquiet souls
    Ris'n from the grave, to ease the heavy guilt
    Of deeds in life conceal'd--of shapes that walk
    At dead of night, and clank their chains, and wave
    The torch of Hell around the murderer's bed!"

Mowbray and Mr. Montenero, who had stayed behind us a few minutes, came
up just as I was, with much emphasis and gesticulation,

    "Waving the torch of Hell."

I am sure I must have been a most ridiculous figure. I saw Mowbray on
the brink of laughter; but Mr. Montenero looked so grave, that he fixed
all my attention. I suddenly stopped.

"We were talking of 'The Pleasures of Imagination,'" said Berenice to
her father. "Mr. Harrington is a great admirer of Akenside."

"Is he?" replied Mr. Montenero coldly, and with a look of absence. "But,
my dear, we can have the pleasures of the imagination another time. Here
are some realities worthy of our present attention."

He then drew his daughter's arm within his. I followed; and all the time
he was pointing out to her the patterns of the Spanish instruments of
torture, with which her politic majesty Queen Elizabeth frightened her
subjects into courage sufficient to repel all the invaders on board the
invincible armada--I stood silent, pondering on what I might have said
or done to displease him whom I was so anxious to please. First, I
thought he suspected me of what I most detested, the affectation of
taste, sensibility, and enthusiasm; next, I fancied that Mowbray,
in explaining about the tapestry-chamber, Sir Josseline, and the
bastinadoed Jew, had said something that might have hurt Mr. Montenero's
Jewish pride. From whichever of these causes his displeasure arose,
it had the effect of completely sobering my spirits. My poetic fit was
over. I did not even dare to speak to his daughter.

During our drive home, Berenice, apropos to something which Mowbray had
said, but which I did not hear, suggested to her father some lines of
Akenside, which she knew he particularly admired, on the nature and
power of the early association of ideas. Mr. Montenero, with all the
warmth my heart could wish, praised the poetic genius, and the intimate
and deep knowledge of the human mind displayed in this passage. His
gravity gradually wore off, and I began to doubt whether the displeasure
had ever existed. At night, before Mowbray and I parted, when we talked
over the day, he assured me that he had said nothing that could make Mr.
Montenero displeased with me or any living creature; that they had been
discussing some point of English History, on which old Montenero had
posed him. As to my fears, Mowbray rallied me out of them effectually.
He maintained that Montenero had not been at all displeased, and that I
was a most absurd _modern self-tormentor._ "Could not a man look grave
for two minutes without my racking my fancy for two hours to find a
cause for it? Perhaps the man had the toothache; possibly the headache;
but why should I, therefore, insist upon having the heartache?"



CHAPTER 11

Mowbray's indifference was often a happy relief to my anxiety of temper;
and I had surely reason to be grateful to him for the sacrifices he
continued daily to make of his own tastes and pleasures, to forward my
views.

One morning in particular, he was going to a rehearsal at Drury-lane,
where I knew his heart was; but finding me very anxious to go to the
Mint and the Bank with Mr. Montenero and Berenice, Mowbray, who had
a relation a Bank director, immediately offered to accompany us, and
procured us the means of seeing every thing in the best possible manner.

Nothing could, as he confessed, be less to his taste; and he was
surprised that Miss Montenero chose to be of the party. A day spent in
viewing the Mint and the Bank, it may perhaps be thought, was a day lost
to love--quite the contrary; I had an opportunity of feeling how the
passion of love can throw its enchantment over scenes apparently least
adapted to its nature.

Before this time I had twice gone over every part of these magnificent
establishments. I had seen at the Bank the spirit of order operating
like predestination, compelling the will of man to act necessarily and
continually with all the precision of mechanism. I had beheld human
creatures, called clerks, turned nearly into arithmetical machines.

But how new did it all appear in looking at it with Berenice! How would
she have been delighted if she had seen those machines, "instinct with
spirit," which now perform the most delicate manoeuvres with more than
human dexterity--the self-moving balance which indefatigably weighs,
accepts, rejects, disposes of the coin, which a mimic hand perpetually
presents!

What chiefly pleased me in Miss Montenero was the composure, the
_sincerity_ of her attention. She was not anxious to display herself: I
was the more delighted when I discovered her quickness of comprehension.
I was charmed too by the unaffected pleasure she showed in acquiring new
ideas, and surprised by the judicious _proportion_ of the admiration she
expressed for all that was in various degrees excellent in arrangement,
or ingenious in contrivance: in short....

"In short, man," as Mowbray would say, "in short, man, you were in love,
and there's an end of the matter: if your Berenice had hopped forty
paces in the public streets, it would have been the same with you."

That I deny--but I will go on with my story.

As we were going away, Mr. Montenero, after thanking Lord Mowbray and
his cousin, the Bank director, who had shown and explained every thing
to us with polite and intelligent patience, observed that the Bank was
to him a peculiarly interesting sight.

"You know," said he, "that we Jews were the first inventors of bills of
exchange and bank-notes--we were originally the bankers and brokers of
the world."

Then, as we walked to the carriage, he continued addressing himself
to his daughter, in a lowered voice, "You see, Berenice, here, as in a
thousand instances, how general and permanent good often results from
partial and temporary evil. The persecutions even to which we Jews
were exposed--the tyranny which drove us from place to place, and
from country to country, at a moment's or without a moment's warning,
compelled us, by necessity, to the invention of a happy expedient, by
which we could convert all our property into a scrap of paper, that
could be carried unseen in a pocket-book, or conveyed in a letter
unsuspected."

Berenice thanked Heaven that the times of persecution were over; and
added, that she hoped any prejudice which still existed would soon die
away.

Mowbray exclaimed against the very idea of the existence of such
prejudices at this time of day in England, among the higher classes.

He did not recollect his own mother, I believe, when he said this; but I
know I had a twinge of conscience about mine, and I did not dare to
look at Mr. Montenero; nor did I know well which way to look, when his
lordship, persisting in his assertion, asked Miss Montenero if she could
possibly imagine that any such vulgar prejudices existed among well-bred
persons. Berenice mildly answered, that she had really as yet enjoyed so
few opportunities of seeing the higher classes of society in London that
she could not form a judgment. She was willing to take upon trust his
lordship's opinion, who must have means of knowing.

I imagined that Mr. Montenero's eye was upon me, and that he was
thinking of my mother's never having made the slightest advance towards
an acquaintance with his daughter. I recollected the speeches I had
made on his first visit, pledging my mother to that which she had never
performed. I felt upon the rack--and a pause, that ensued afterwards,
increased my misery. I longed for somebody to say something--any thing.
I looked for assistance to Mowbray. He repeated, confidently, that
Miss Montenero might entirely rely upon what he said as to London and
England--indeed he had been a good deal abroad _too_. He seemed to be
glad to get to the continent again--I followed him as fast as I could,
and inquired whether he did not think that the French and Germans were
much improved in liberality, and a spirit of toleration.

"Give me leave," said Mr. Montenero, "to answer for the improvement of
the Germans. Fifteen years ago, I remember, when I was travelling in
Germany, I was stopped at a certain bridge over the Rhine, and, being
a Jew, was compelled to pay rather an ignominious toll. The Jews were
there classed among cloven-footed beasts, and as such paid toll. But,
within these few years, sixteen German princes, enlightened and inspired
by one great writer, and one good minister, have combined to abolish
this disgraceful tax. You see, my dear Berenice, your hope is quickly
fulfilling--prejudices are dying away fast. Hope humbly, but hope
always."

The playful tone in which Mr. Montenero spoke, put me quite at my ease.

The next day I was determined on an effort to make my mother acquainted
with Miss Montenero. If I could but effect a meeting, a great point
I thought would be gained. Mowbray undertook to manage it, and he,
as usual, succeeded. He persuaded his mother to go to an auction of
pictures, where he assured her she would be likely to meet with a
Vandyke of one of her ancestors, of whose portrait she had long been
in search. Lady de Brantefield engaged my mother to be of the party,
without her having any suspicion that she would meet the Monteneros.
We arrived in time to secure the best places, before the auction
began. Neither Mr. nor Miss Montenero were there; but, to my utter
discomfiture, a few minutes after we were seated, vulgar Mrs. Coates and
all her tribe appeared. She elbowed her difficult way onward towards us,
and nodding to me familiarly, seated herself and her Vandals on a line
with us. Then, stretching herself across the august Lady de Brantefield,
who drew back, far as space would permit, "Beg your pardon, ma'am, but I
just want to say a word to this lady. A'n't you the lady--yes--that sat
beside me at the play the other night--the Merchant of Venice and
the Maid of the Oaks, was not it, Izzy? I hope you caught no cold,
ma'am--you look but poorly, I am sorry to notice--but what I wanted
to say, ma'am, here's an ivory fan Miss Montenero was in a pucker and
quandary about." _Pucker and quandary!_--Oh! how I groaned inwardly!

"I was in such a fuss about her, you know, sir, that I never found out,
till I got home, I had pocketed a strange fan--here it is, ma'am, if it
is yours--it's worth any body's owning, I am sure."

The fan was my mother's, and she was forced to be much obliged. Lady de
Brantefield, still painfully holding back, did not resume her position
till some seconds had elapsed after Mrs. Coates had withdrawn her fat
bust--till it might be supposed that the danger of coming into contact
with her was fairly over. My mother, after a decent interval, asked me
if it were possible to move to some place where they could have more
air, as the crowd was increasing. Lord Mowbray and I made way for her
to a seat by an open window; but the persevering Mrs. Coates followed,
talking about the famous elbows of Mr. Peter Coates, on whose arm she
leaned. "When Peter chooses, there's not a man in Lon'on knows the use
of his elbows better, and if we'd had him, Mr. Harrington, with us at
the play, the other night, we should not have given you so much trouble
with Miss Montenero, getting her out."

Lord Mowbray, amused by my look of suffering, could not refrain
from diverting himself further by asking a question or two about the
Monteneros. It was soon apparent, from the manner in which Mrs. Coates
answered, that she was not as well pleased with them as formerly.

It was her maxim, she said, to speak of the bridge as she went over it;
and for her part, if she was to give her verdict, she couldn't but
say Miss Montenero--for they weren't on terms to call her Miss Berry
now--was a little incomprehensible sometimes.

A look of surprise from Lord Mowbray, without giving himself the trouble
to articulate, was quite sufficient to make the lady go on.

"Why, if it concerned any gentleman" (glancing her ill-bred eye upon
me), "if any gentleman was thinking of looking that way, it might be
of use to him to know the land. Miss Montenero, then, if truth must be
told, is a little touchy on the Jewish chapter."

Lord Mowbray urged Mrs. Coates on with "How, for instance?" "Oh, how!
why, my lord, a hundred times I've hurt her to the quick. One can't
always be thinking of people's different persuasions you know--and if
one asked a question, just for information's sake, or made a natural
remark, as I did t'other day, Queeney, you know, just about Jew
butchers, and pigeons--'It's a pity,' said I, 'that Jews must always
have Jew butchers, Miss Berry, and that there is so many things they
can't touch: one can't have pigeons nor hares at one's table,' said I,
thinking only of my second course; 'as to pork, Henny,' says I, 'that's
a coarse butcher's meat, which I don't regret, nor the alderman, a
pinch o' snuff'--now, you know, I thought that was kind of me; but Miss
Montenero took it all the wrong way, quite to heart so, you've no idear!
After all, she may say what she pleases, but it's my notion the Jews is
both a very unsocial and a very revengeful people; for, do you know, my
lord, they wouldn't dine with us next day, though the alderman called
himself."

My mother was so placed that she could not avoid hearing all that Mrs.
Coates said to Lord Mowbray; and though she never uttered a syllable,
or raised her eyes, or moved the fan she held in her hand, I knew by
her countenance the impression that was made on her mind: she would have
scorned, on any other subject of human life or manners, to have allowed
the judgment of Mrs. Coates to weigh with her in the estimation of
a single hair; yet here her opinion and _idears_ were admitted to be
decisive.

Such is prejudice! thought I. Prejudice, even in the proudest people,
will stoop to accept of nourishment from any hand. Prejudice not only
grows on what it feeds upon, but converts every thing it meets with into
nourishment.

How clear-sighted I was to the nature of prejudice at this moment,
and how many reflections passed in one instant, which I had never made
before in the course of my life!--Meantime Mrs. Coates had beckoned
to her son Peter, and Peter had drawn near, and was called upon by his
mother to explain to my lord the cause of the _coolness_ betwixt the
alderman and Mr. Montenero: "It was," she said, "about the Manessas, and
a young man called Jacob."

Peter was not as fluent as his mother, and she went on. "It was some
money matter. Mr. Montenero had begun by acting a very generous part,
she understood, at first, by way of being the benevolent Jew, but had
not come up to the alderman's expectations latterly, and had shown a
most illiberal partiality to the Manessas, and this Jacob, only
because they _was_ Jews; which, you know," said Mrs. Coates, "was very
ungentleman-like to the alderman, after all the civilities we had shown
the Monteneros on their coming to Lon'on--as Peter, if he could open his
mouth, could tell you."

Peter had just opened his mouth, when Mr. Montenero appearing, he closed
it again. To my inexpressible disappointment, Miss Montenero was not
with her father. Mr. Montenero smiled the instant he caught my eye, but
seeing my mother as he approached, he bowed gravely, and passed on.

"And never noticed me, I declare," said Mrs. Coates: "that's too good!"

"But Miss Montenero! I thought she was to be here?" cried Mowbray.

Mrs. Coates, after her fashion, stretching across two of her daughters,
whispered to the third, loud enough for all to hear, "Queeney, this
comes of airs!--This comes of her not choosing for to go abroad with me,
I suppose."

"If people doesn't know their friends when they has 'em," replied
Queeney, "they may go farther and fare worse: that's all I have to say."

"Hush!" said Peter, giving his sister a monitory pinch--"can't you say
your say under your breath? _he's_ within seven of you, and he has ears
like the devil."

"All them Jews has, and Jewesses too; they think one's always talking
of them, they're so suspicious," said Mrs. Coates. "I am told, moreover,
that they've ways and means of hearing."

To my great relief, she was interrupted by the auctioneer, and the sound
of his hammer. The auction went on, and nothing but "Who bids more?
going!--going!--who bids more?" was heard for a considerable time.
Not being able to get near Mr. Montenero, and having failed in all my
objects, I grew excessively tired, and was going away, leaving my
mother to the care of Mowbray, but he stopped me. "Stay, stay," said
he, drawing me aside, behind two connoisseurs, who were babbling about
a Titian, "you will have some diversion by and by. I have a picture to
sell, and you must see how it will go off. There is a painting that I
bought at a stall for nothing, upon a speculation that my mother, who is
a judge, will pay dear for; and what do you think the picture is? Don't
look so stupid--it will interest you amazingly, and Mr. Montenero too,
and 'tis a pity your Jewess is not here to see it. Did you ever hear of
a picture called the 'Dentition of the Jew?'"

"Not I."

"You'll see, presently," said Mowbray.

"But tell me _now_," said I.

"Only the drawing the teeth of the Jew, by order of some one of our most
merciful lords the kings--John, Richard, or Edward."

"It will be a companion to the old family picture of the Jew and Sir
Josseline," continued Mowbray; "and this will make the vile daub, which
I've had the luck to pick up, invaluable to my mother, and I trust very
valuable to me."

"There! Christie has it up! The dear rascal! hear him puff it!"

Lady de Brantefield put up her glass, but neither she nor I could
distinguish a single figure in the picture, the light so glared upon it.

Christie caught her ladyship's eye, and addressed himself directly to
her. But her ladyship was deaf. Mowbray pressed forward to her ear, and
repeated all Christie roared. No sooner did she understand the subject
of the picture than she turned to her son, to desire him to bid for her;
but Mowbray substituted Topham in his stead: Topham obeyed.

"Who bids more?"

A bidder started up, who seemed very eager. He was, we were told, an
engraver.

"Who bids more?"

To our surprise, Mr. Montenero was the person to bid more--and more,
and more, and more. The engraver soon gave up the contest, but her
ladyship's pride and passions rose when she found Mr. Montenero
continued to bid against her; and she persisted, till she came up to an
extravagant sum; and still she desired Colonel Topham to bid on.

"Beyond my expectation, faith! Both mad!" whispered Mowbray. I thought
so too. Still Mr. Montenero went higher.

"I'll go no higher," said Lady de Brantefield; "you may let it be
knocked down to that person, Colonel." Then turning to her son, "Who is
the man that bids against me?"

"A Jewish gentleman, ma'am, I believe."

"A Jew, perhaps--gentleman, I deny; no Jew ever was or ever will be a
gentleman. I am sure our family, since the time of Sir Josseline, have
had reason enough to know that."

"Very true, ma'am--I'll call for your carriage, for I suppose you have
had enough of this."

Mowbray carried me with him. "Come off," said he; "I long to hear
Montenero descant on the merits of the dentition. Do you speak, for you
can do it with a better face."

Mowbray seemed to be intent merely upon his own diversion; he must have
seen and felt how reluctant I was: but, taking my arm, he dragged me on
to Mr. Montenero, who was standing near a window, with the picture in
his hand, examining it attentively. Mowbray pushed me on close behind
Mr. Montenero--the light now falling on the picture, I saw it for the
first time, and the sight struck me with such associated feelings of
horror, that I started back, exclaiming, with vehement gestures, "I
cannot bear it! I cannot bear that picture!"

Mr. Montenero turned, and looked at me with surprise.

"I beg pardon, sir," said I; "but it made me absolutely--"

"Sick," said Mr. Montenero, opening the window, as I leaned back against
the wall, and the eyes of all present were fixed upon me. Ashamed of the
exaggerated expression of my feelings, I stood abashed. Mr. Montenero,
with the greatest kindness of manner, and with friendly presence of
mind, said he remembered well having felt actually sick at the sight of
certain pictures. "For instance, my lord," said he, addressing
himself to Lord Mowbray, "the famous picture of the flaying the unjust
magistrate I never could look at steadily."

I recovered myself--and squeezing Mr. Montenero's hand to express my
sense of his kind politeness, I exerted myself to talk and to look at
the picture. Afraid of Mowbray's ridicule, I never once turned my
eyes towards him--I fancied that he was laughing behind me: I did
him injustice; he was not laughing--he looked seriously concerned. He
whispered to me, "Forgive me, my dear Harrington--I aimed at _mamma_--I
did not mean to hurt you."

Before we quitted the subject, I expressed to Mr. Montenero my surprise
at his having purchased, at an extraordinary price, a picture apparently
of so little merit, and on such a disgusting subject.

"Abuse the subject as much as you please," interrupted Mowbray; "but as
to the merit of the painting, have the grace, Harrington, to consider,
that Mr. Montenero must be a better judge than you or I."

"You are too good a judge yourself, my lord," replied Mr. Montenero,
in a reserved tone, "not to see this picture to be what it really is,
a very poor performance." Then turning to me in a cordial manner, "Be
assured, Mr. Harrington, that I am at least as clear-sighted, in every
point of view, as you can possibly be, to its demerits."

"Then why did you purchase it?" was the question, which involuntarily
recurred to Mowbray and to me; but we were both silent, and stood with
our eyes fixed upon the picture.

"Gentlemen, if you will do me the honour to dine with me to-morrow,"
said Mr. Montenero, "you shall know the purpose for which I bought this
picture."

We accepted the invitation; Mowbray waited for to-morrow with all
the eagerness of curiosity, and I with the eagerness of a still more
impatient passion.

I pass over my mother's remonstrances against my _dining at the
Monteneros';_ remonstrances, strengthened as they were in vehemence,
if not in reason, by all the accession of force gathered from the
representations and insinuations of Mrs. Coates.

The next day came. "Now we shall hear about the dentition of the Jew,"
said Mowbray, as we got to Mr. Montenero's door.

And now we shall see Berenice! thought I.

We found a very agreeable company assembled, mixed of English and
foreigners. There was the Spanish ambassador and the Russian envoy--who,
by-the-by, spoke English better than any foreigner I ever heard; a
Polish Count, perfectly well bred, and his lady, a beautiful woman, with
whom Mowbray of course was half in love before dinner was over. The only
English present were General and Lady Emily B----. We soon learned, by
the course of the conversation, that Mr. Montenero stood high in the
estimation of every individual in the company, all of whom had known him
intimately at different times of his life, and in different countries.
The general had served in America during the beginning of the war; he
had been wounded there, and in great difficulties and distress. He and
his lady, under very trying circumstances, had been treated in the most
kind and hospitable manner by Mr. Montenero and his family. With that
true English warmth of gratitude, which contrasts so strongly and
agreeably with the natural reserve of English manner and habits, the
general and his wife, Lady Emily, expressed their joy at having Mr.
Montenero in England, in London, among their own friends.

"My dear, Mr. Montenero must let us introduce him to your brother
and our other friends--how delighted they will be to see him! And
Berenice!--she was such a little creature, General, at the time you saw
her last!--but such a kind, sweet, little creature!--You remember her
scraping the lint!"

"Remember it! certainly."

They spoke of her, and looked at her, as if she was their own child; and
for my part, I could have embraced both the old general and his wife.
I only wished that my mother had been present to receive an antidote to
Mrs. Coates.

"Oh! please Heaven, we will make London--we'll make England agreeable
to you--two years! no; that won't do--we will keep you with us for
ever--you shall never go back to America."

Then, in a low voice, to Mr. Montenero, the general added, "Do you think
we have not an Englishman good enough for her?"

I felt the blood rush into my face, and dreaded that every eye must see
it. When I had the courage to raise my head and to look round, I saw
that I was perfectly safe, and that no creature was thinking about me,
not even Mowbray, who was gallanting the Polish lady. I ventured then
to look towards Berenice; but all was tranquil there--she had not, I
was sure, heard the whisper. Mr. Montenero had his eye upon her; the
father's eye and mine met--and such a penetrating, yet such a benevolent
eye! I endeavoured to listen with composure to whatever was going on.
The general was talking of his brother-in-law, Lord Charles; a panic
seized me, and a mortal curiosity to know what sort of a man the
brother-in-law might be. I was not relieved till the dessert came on
the table, when, apropos to something a Swedish gentleman said about
Linnaeus, strawberries, and the gout, it appeared, to my unspeakable
satisfaction, that Lord Charles had the gout at this instant, and had
been subject to it during the last nine years. I had been so completely
engrossed by my own feelings and imaginations, that I had never once
thought of that which had previously excited our curiosity--the picture,
till, as we were going into another room to drink coffee, Mowbray said
to me, "We hear nothing of the dentition of the Jew: I can't put him in
mind of it."

"Certainly not," said I. "There is a harp; I hope Miss Montenero will
play on it," added I.

After coffee we had some good music, in different styles, so as to
please, and interest, and join in one common sympathy, all the company,
many of whom had never before heard each other's national music.
Berenice was asked to play some Hebrew music, the good general reminding
her that he knew she had a charming ear and a charming voice when she
was a child. She had not, however, been used to sing or play before
numbers, and she resisted the complimentary entreaties; but when the
company were all gone, except the general and his lady, Mowbray and
myself, her father requested that Berenice would try one song, and
that she would play one air on the harp to oblige her old friends: she
immediately complied, with a graceful unaffected modesty that
interested every heart in her favour--I can answer for my own; though no
connoisseur, I was enthusiastically fond of good music. Miss Montenero's
voice was exquisite: both the poetry and the music were sublime and
touching. No compliments were paid; but when she ceased, all were
silent, in hopes that the harp would be touched again by the same hand.
At this moment, Mr. Montenero, turning to Lord Mowbray and to me, said,
"Gentlemen, I recollect my promise to you, and will perform it--I will
now explain why I bought that painting which you saw me yesterday so
anxious to obtain."

He rang the bell, and desired a servant to bring in the picture which
he had purchased at the auction, and to desire Jacob to come with it. As
soon as it was brought in, I retired to the farther end of the room.
In Mowbray's countenance there was a strange mixture of contempt and
curiosity.

Mr. Montenero kindly said to me, "I shall not insist, Mr. Harrington, on
your looking at it; I know it is not to your taste."

I immediately approached, resolved to stand the sight, that I might not
be suspected of affectation.

Berenice had not yet seen the painting: she shrunk back the moment
she beheld it, exclaiming, "Oh, father! Why purchase such a horrible
picture?"

"To destroy it," said Mr. Montenero. And deliberately he took the
picture out of its frame and cut it to pieces, repeating, "To destroy
it, my dear, as I would, were it in my power, every record of cruelty
and intolerance. So perish all that can keep alive feelings of hatred
and vengeance between Jews and Christians!"

"Amen," said the good old general, and all present joined in that
_amen_. I heard it pronounced by Miss Montenero in a very low voice, but
distinctly and fervently.

While I stood with my eyes fixed on Berenice, and while Mowbray loudly
applauded her father's liberality, Mr. Montenero turned to Jacob and
said, "I sent for my friend Jacob to be present at the burning of this
picture, because it was he who put it in my power to prevent this horrid
representation from being seen and sold in every print-shop in London.
Jacob, who goes every where, and _sees_ wherever he goes, observed
this picture at a broker's shop, and found that two persons had been in
treaty for it. One of them had the appearance of an amateur, the other
was an artist, an engraver. The engraver was, I suppose, the person who
bid against Colonel Topham and me; who the other gentleman was, and why
he bought in to sell it again at that auction, perhaps Jacob knows, but
I have never inquired."

Then, with Jacob's assistance, Mr. Montenero burned every shred of this
abominable picture, to my inexpressible satisfaction.

During this _auto-da-f_, Jacob cast a glance at Mowbray, the meaning
of which I could not at first comprehend; but I supposed that he was
thinking of the fire, at which all he had in the world had been consumed
at Gibraltar. I saw, or thought I saw, that Jacob checked the feeling
this recollection excited. He turned to me, and in a low voice told me,
that Mr. Montenero had been so kind as to obtain for him a lucrative and
creditable situation in the house of Manessa, the jeweller; and the next
day he was to go to Mr. Manessa's, and to commence business.

"So, Mr. Harrington, you see that after all my misfortunes, I am now
established in a manner far above what could have been expected for poor
Jacob--far above his most sanguine hopes. Thanks to my good friends."

"And to your good self," said I.

I was much pleased with Mowbray at this instant, for the manner in which
he joined in my praise of Jacob, and in congratulations to him. His
lordship promised that he would recommend his house to all his family
and friends.

"What a contrast," said Mowbray, as soon as Jacob had left the room,
"there is between Jacob and his old rival, Dutton! That fellow has
turned out very ill--drunken, idle dog--is reduced to an old-iron
shop, I believe--always plaguing me with begging letters. Certainly,
Harrington, you may triumph in your election of Jacob."

I never saw Berenice and her father look so much pleased with Mowbray as
they did at this instant.

Of the remainder of the evening I recollect nothing but Berenice, and of
my staying later than I ought to have done. Even after the general
and his wife had departed some time, I lingered. I was to go home in
Mowbray's carriage, and twice he had touched my shoulder, telling me
that I was not aware how late it was. I could not conceive how he could
think of going so early.

"Early!" He directed my eye to the clock on the chimneypiece. I was
ashamed to see the hour. I apologized to Mr. Montenero. He replied in a
manner that was more than polite--that was quite affectionate; and his
last words, repeated at the head of the stairs, expressed a desire to
see me again _frequently_.

I sprang into Mowbray's carriage one of the happiest men on earth, full
of love, hope, and joy.



CHAPTER 12

"All gone to bed but you?" said I to the footman, who opened the door.

"No, sir," said the drowsy fellow, "my lady is sitting up for you, I
believe."

"Then, Mowbray, come in--come up with me to my mother, pray do, for one
instant."

Before she slept, I said, he must administer an antidote to Coates's
poison. While the impression was still fresh in his mind, I entreated
he would say what a delightful party we had had. My mother, I knew,
had such a high idea of his lordship's judgment in all that concerned
gentility and fashion, that a word from him would be decisive. "But let
it be to-morrow morning," said Mowbray; "'tis shamefully late to-night."

"To-night--to-night--now, now," persisted I. He complied: "Any thing to
oblige you."

"Remember," said I, as we ran up stairs, "Spanish ambassador, Russian
envoy, Polish Count and Countess, and an English general and his
lady--strong in rank we'll burst upon the enemy." I flung open the door,
but my spirits were suddenly checked; I saw it was no time for jest and
merriment.

Dead silence--solemn stillness--candles with unsnuffed wicks of
portentous length. My father and mother were sitting with their backs
half turned to each other, my mother leaning her head on her hand, with
her elbow on the table, her salts before her. My father sitting in his
arm-chair, legs stretched out, feet upon the bars of the grate, back
towards us--but that back spoke anger as plainly as a back could speak.
Neither figure moved when we entered. I stood appalled; Mowbray went
forward, though I caught his arm to pull him back. But he did not
understand me, and with ill-timed gaiety and fluency, that I would have
given the world to stop, he poured forth to my mother in praise of all
we had seen and heard; and then turning to my father, who slowly rose,
shading his eyes from the candle, and looking at me under the hand,
Lord Mowbray went on with a rapturous eulogium upon Harrington's Jew and
Jewess.

"Then it is all true," said my father. "It is all very well,
Harrington--but take notice, and I give you notice in time, in form,
before your friend and counsellor, Lord Mowbray, that by Jupiter--by
Jupiter Ammon, I will never leave one shilling to my son, if he marry
a Jewess! Every inch of my estate shall go from him to his cousin
Longshanks in the North, though I hate him like sin. But a Jewess for my
daughter-in-law I will never have--by Jupiter Ammon!"

So snatching up a bougie, the wick of which scattered fire behind him,
he left the room.

"Good Heavens! what have I done?" cried Mowbray.

"What you can never undo," said I.

My mother spoke not one word, but sat smelling her salts.

"Never fear, man," whispered Mowbray; "he will sleep it off, or by
to-morrow we shall find ways and means."

He left me in despair. I heard his carriage roll away--and then
there was silence again. I stood waiting for some explanation from my
mother--she saw my despair--she dreaded my anger: in broken and scarcely
intelligible, contradictory phrases, she declared her innocence of all
intention to do me mischief, and acknowledged that all was her doing;
but reminded me, that she had prophesied it would come to this--it would
end ill--and at last, trembling with impatience as I stood, she told me
all that had happened.

The fact was, that she had talked to her friend Lady de Brantefield, and
some other of her dear friends, of her dread that I should fall in love
with Miss Montenero; and the next person said I had fallen in love with
her; and under the seal of secresy,--it was told that I had actually
proposed for her, but that my father was to know nothing of the
matter. This story had been written in some young lady's letter to her
correspondent in the country, and miss in the country had told it to her
brother, who had come to town this day, dined in company with my father,
got drunk, and had given a bumper toast to "Miss Montenero, the Jewish
heiress--_Mrs. Harrington, jun. that is to be!_"

My father had come home foaming with rage; my mother had done all she
could to appease him, and to make him comprehend that above half what
he had heard was false; but it had gone the wrong way into his head, and
there was no getting it out again. My father had heard it at the most
unlucky time possible, just after he had lost a good place, and was
driven to the necessity of selling an estate that had been in his family
since the time of Richard the Second. My mother farther informed me,
that my father had given orders, in his usual sudden way when angry, for
going into the country immediately. While she was yet speaking, the door
opened, and my father, with his nightcap on, put his head in, saying,
"Remember, ma'am, you are to be off at seven to-morrow--and you sir,"
continued he, advancing towards me, "if you have one grain of sense
left, I recommend it to you to come with us. But no, I see it written
in your absurd face, that you will not--obstinate madman! I leave you
to your own discretion," cried he, turning his back upon me; "but, by
Jupiter Ammon, I'll do what I say, by Jupiter!" And carrying my mother
off with him, he left me to my pleasing reflections.

All was tumult in my mind: one moment I stood motionless in utter
despair, the next struck with some bright hope. I walked up and down the
room with hasty strides--then stopped short again, and stood fixed,
as some dark reality, some sense of improbability--of impossibility,
crossed my mind, and as my father's denunciation recurred to my ear.

A Jewess!--her religion--her principles--my principles!--And can a
Jewess marry a Christian? And should a Christian marry a Jewess? The
horrors of family quarrels, of religious dissensions and disputes
between father and child, husband and wife--All these questions, and
fears, and doubts, passed through my imagination backwards and forwards
with inconceivable rapidity--struck me with all the amazement of
novelty, though in fact they were not new to me. The first moment I saw
her, I was told she was a Jewess; I was aware of the difficulties, and
yet I had never fixed my view upon them: I had suffered myself to waive
the consideration of them till this moment. In the hope, the joy, the
heaven of the first feelings of the passion of love, I had lost sight of
all difficulties, human or divine; and now I was called upon to decide
in one hour upon questions involving the happiness of my whole life. To
be called upon before it was necessary too--for I was not in love, not
I--at least I had formed no idea of marrying, no resolution to propose.
Then bitterly I execrated the reporters, and the gossipers, and the
letter-writing misses, whose tattling, and meddling, and idleness, and
exaggeration, and absolute falsehood, had precipitated me into this
misery. The drunken brute, too, who had blundered out to my father that
fatal toast, had his full share of my indignation; and my mother, with
her _presentiments_--and Mowbray, with his inconceivable imprudence--and
my father, with his prejudices, his violence, and his Jupiter
Ammon--every body, and every thing I blamed, except myself. And when I
had vented my rage, still the question recurred, what was to be done?
how should I resolve? Morning was come, the grey light was peeping
through the shutters: I opened the window to feel the fresh calm air.
I heard the people beginning to stir in the house: my father and mother
were to be called at half after six. Six struck; I must decide at least,
whether I would go with them or not. No chance of my father sleeping it
off! Obstinate beyond conception; and by Jupiter Ammon once sworn, never
revoked. But after all, where was the great evil of being disinherited?
The loss of my paternal estate, in this moment of enthusiasm, appeared a
loss I could easily endure. Berenice was an heiress--a rich heiress, and
I had a small estate of my own, left to me by my grandfather. I could
live with Berenice upon any thing--upon nothing. Her wishes were
moderate, I was sure--I should not, however, reduce her to poverty; no,
her fortune would be sufficient for us both. It would be mortifying
to my pride--it would be painful to receive instead of to give--I had
resolved never to be under such an obligation to a wife; but with such
a woman as Berenice!--I would submit--submit to accept her and her
fortune.

Then, as to her being a Jewess--who knows what changes love might
produce? Voltaire and Mowbray say, "qu'une femme est toujours de la
religion de son amant."

At this instant I heard a heavy foot coming down the back stairs; the
door opened, and a yawning housemaid appeared, and started at the sight
of me.

"Gracious! I didn't think it was so late! Mistress bid me ask the first
thing I did--but I didn't know it was so late--Mercy! there's master's
bell--whether you go or not, sir?"

"Certainly not," said I; and after having uttered this determination, I
was more at ease. I sat down, and wrote a note to my father, in the most
respectful and eloquent terms I could devise, judging that it was better
to write than to speak to him on the subject. Then I vacated the room
for the housemaid, and watched in my own apartment till all the noises
of preparation and of departure were over; and till I heard the sound of
the carriage driving away. I was surprised that my mother had not come
to me to endeavour to persuade me to change my determination; but my
father, I heard, had hurried her into the carriage--my note I found on
the table torn down the middle.

I concluded that my cousin Longshanks was in a fair way to have the
estate; but I went to bed and to sleep, and I was consoled with dreams
of Berenice.

Mowbray was with me in the morning before I was dressed. I had felt so
angry with him, that I had resolved a hundred times during the night
that I would never more admit him into my confidence--however, he
contrived to prevent my reproaches, and dispel my anger, by the great
concern he expressed for his precipitation. He blamed himself so much,
that, instead of accusing, I began to comfort him. I assured him that
he had, in fact, done me a service instead of an injury, by bringing my
affairs suddenly to a crisis: I had thus been forced to come at once
to a decision. "What decision?" he eagerly asked. My heart was at this
instant in such immediate want of sympathy, that it opened to him.
I told him all that had passed between my father and me, told him my
father's vow, and my resolution to continue, at all hazards, my pursuit
of Berenice. He heard me with astonishment: he said he could not tell
which was most rash, my father's vow, or my resolution.

"And your father is gone, actually gone," cried Mowbray; "and, in spite
of his Jupiter Ammon, you stand resolved to brave your fate, and to
pursue the fair Jewess?"

"Even so," said I: "this day I will know my fate--this day I will
propose for Miss Montenero."

Against this mad precipitation he argued in the most earnest manner.

"If you were the first duke in England, Harrington," said he, "with the
finest estate, undipped, unencumbered, unentailed; if, consequently,
you had nothing to do but to ask and have any woman for a wife; still
I should advise you, if you meant to secure the lady's heart as well as
her hand, not to begin in this novice-like manner, by letting her see
her power over you: neither woman nor man ever valued an easy conquest.
No, trust me, keep your mind to yourself till the lady is dying to know
it--keep your own counsel till the lady can no longer keep hers: when
you are sure of her not being able to refuse you, then ask for her heart
as humbly as you please."

To the whole of this doctrine I could not, in honour, generosity, or
delicacy accede. Of the wisdom of avoiding the danger of a refusal I was
perfectly sensible; but, in declaring my attachment to Miss Montenero, I
meant only to ask permission to address her. To win her heart I was
well aware must be a work of time; but the first step was to deserve her
esteem, and to begin by conducting myself towards her, and her father,
with perfect sincerity and openness. The more I was convinced of my
father's inflexibility, the more desperate I knew my circumstances were,
the more I was bound not to mislead by false appearances. They would
naturally suppose that I should inherit my father's fortune--I knew that
I should not, if--

"So, then," interrupted Mowbray, "with your perfect openness and
sincerity, you will go to Mr. Montenero, and you will say, 'Sir, that
you are a Jew, I know; that you are as rich as a Jew, I hope; that
you are a fool, I take for granted: at all events, I am a madman and
a beggar, or about to be a beggar. My father, who is a good and a most
obstinate Christian, swore last night by Jupiter Ammon, the only oath
which he never breaks, that he will disinherit me if I marry a Jewess:
therefore, I come this morning to ask you, sir, for your daughter, who
is a Jewess, and as I am told, a great heiress--which last circumstance
is, in my opinion, a great objection, but I shall overcome it in favour
of your daughter, if you will be pleased to give her to me. Stay, sir, I
beg your pardon, sir, excuse the hurry of the passions, which, probably,
you have long since forgotten; the fact is, I do not mean to ask you
for your daughter,--I came simply to ask your permission to fall in love
with her, which I have already done without your permission; and I trust
she has, on her part, done likewise; for if I had not a shrewd suspicion
that your Jessica was ready, according to the custom of Jews' daughters,
to jump out of a two-pair of stairs window into her lover's arms, madman
as I am, I could not be such an idiot as to present myself before you,
as I now do, sir, suing _in forma pauperis_ for the pleasure of becoming
your son-in-law. I must further have the honour to tell you, and with
perfect sincerity and consideration let me inform you, sir, that my
Christian father and mother having resolved never to admit a Jewish
daughter-in-law to the honours of the maternal or paternal embrace, when
your daughter shall do me the favour to become my wife, she need not
quit your house or family, as she cannot be received into mine. Here,
sir, I will rest my cause; but I might farther plead--'"

"Plead no more for or against me, Mowbray," interrupted I, angrily
turning from him, for I could bear it no longer. Enthusiasm detests
wit much, and humour more. Enthusiasm, fancying itself raised above the
reach of ridicule, is always incensed when it feels that it is not safe
from its shafts.

Mowbray changed his tone, and checking his laughter, said seriously, and
with an air of affectionate sympathy, that, at the hazard of displeasing
me, he had used the only means he had conceived to be effectual to
prevent me from taking a step which he was convinced would be fatal.

I thanked him for his advice, but I had previously been too much piqued
by his raillery to allow his reasons even their due weight: besides, I
began to have a secret doubt of the sincerity of his friendship. In his
turn, he was provoked by my inflexible adherence to my own opinion; and
perhaps, suspecting my suspicion, he was the more readily displeased.
He spoke with confidence, I thought with arrogance, as a man notoriously
successful in the annals of gallantry, treating me, as I could not bear
to be treated, like a novice.

"I flatter myself, no man is less a coxcomb with regard to women than
I am," Lord Mowbray modestly began; "but if I were inclined to boast,
I believe it is pretty generally allowed in town, by all who know any
thing of these things, that my practice in gallantry has been somewhat
successful--perhaps undeservedly so; still, in these cases, the world
judges by success: I may, therefore, be permitted to think that I know
something of women. My advice consequently, I thought, might be of use;
but, after all, perhaps I am wrong: often those who imagine that they
know women best, know them least."

I replied that I did not presume to vie with Lord Mowbray as a man of
gallantry; but I should conceive that the same precepts, and the same
arts, which ensured success with women of a _certain class_, might
utterly fail with women of different habits and tastes. If the question
were how to win such and such an actress (naming one who had sacrificed
her reputation for Mowbray, and another, for whom he was sacrificing
his fortune), I should, I said, implicitly follow his advice; but that,
novice as I was in gallantry, I should venture to follow my own judgment
as to the mode of pleasing such a woman as Miss Montenero.

"None but a novice," Mowbray answered, laughing, "could think that there
was any essential difference between woman and woman." Every woman was
at heart the same. Of this he was so much convinced, that though he
had not, he said, any absurd confidence in his own peculiar powers of
pleasing, he was persuaded, that if honour had not put the trial quite
out of the question on his part, he could as easily have won the fair
Jewess as any other of her sex.

My indignation rose.

"Honour and friendship to me, my lord, are out of the question: forgive
me, if I own that I do not think your lordship would there have any
chance of success."

"At all events you know you are safe; I cannot make the trial without
your permission." "Your lordship is perfectly at liberty, if you think
proper, to make the trial."

"Indeed!--Are you in earnest?--Now you have put it into my head, I will
think of it seriously."

Then in a careless, pick-tooth manner, he stood, as if for some moments
debating the matter with himself.

"I have no great taste for matrimony or for Jewesses, but a Jewish
heiress in the present state of my affairs--Harrington, you know the
pretty little gipsy--the actress who played Jessica that night, so
famous in your imagination, so fatal to us both--well, my little
Jessica has, since that time, played away at a rare rate with my ready
money--_dipped me_ confoundedly--'twould be poetic justice to make one
Jewess pay for another, if one could. Two hundred thousand pounds, Miss
Montenero is, I think they say. 'Pon my sincerity, 'tis a temptation!
Now it strikes me--if I am not bound in honour--"

I walked away in disgust, while Mowbray, in the same tone, continued,
"Let me see, now--suppose--only suppose--any thing may be by
supposition--suppose we were rivals. As rivals, things would be
wonderfully fair and even between us. You, Harrington, I grant, have the
advantage of first impressions--she has smiled upon you; while I, bound
in honour, stood by like a mummy--but unbound, set at liberty by express
permission--give me a fortnight's time, and if I don't make her blush,
my name's not Mowbray!--and no matter whom a woman smiles upon, the man
who makes her blush is the man. But seriously, Harrington, am I hurting
your feelings? If what is play to me is death to you, I have done. Bind
me over again to my good behaviour you may, by a single word. Instead
of defying me, only swear, or, stay--I won't put you to your oath--say
candidly, upon your honour, Lord Mowbray puts you in fear of your love."

"I neither defy you nor fear you, my lord!" said I, with a tone and
look which at any other time Lord Mowbray, who was prompt enough to
take offence, would have understood as it was meant. But he was now
determined not to be provoked by any thing I could say or look. Standing
still at ease, he continued, "Not fear me!--Not bind me in honour!--Then
I have nobody's feelings to consult but my own. So, as I was
considering, things are marvellously nicely balanced between us. In
point of fortune, both beggars--nearly; for though my father did not
disinherit me, I have disinherited myself. Then our precious mothers
will go mad on the spot, in white satin, if either of us marry a Jewess.
Well! that is even between us. Then religious scruples--you have some,
have not you?"

"I have, my lord."

"Dry enough--there I have the advantage--I have none. Mosque--high
church--low church--no church--don't let me shock you. I thought you
were for universal toleration; I am for liberty of conscience, in
marriage at least. You are very liberal, I know. You're in love, and
you'd marry even a Jewess, would not you, if you could not contrive to
convert her? I am not in love, but shall be soon, I feel; and when once
I am in love!--I turn idolater, plump. Now, an idolater's worse than a
Jew: so I should make it a point of conscience to turn Jew, to please
the fair Jewess, if requisite."

"My lord, this trifling I can bear no longer; I must beg seriously that
we may understand each other."

"Trifling!--Never was more serious in my life. I'd turn Jew--I'd turn
any thing, for a woman I loved."

"Have you, or have you not, my lord, any intention of addressing Miss
Montenero?"

"Since I have your permission--since you have put it in my head--since
you have piqued me--frankly--yes."

"I thank you for your frankness, my lord; I understand you. Now we
understand each other," said I.

"Why, yes--and 'tis time we should," said Mowbray, coolly, "knowing one
another, as we have done, even from our boyish days. You may remember, I
never could bear to be piqued, _en honneur;_ especially by you, my dear
Harrington. It was written above, that we were to be rivals. But still,
if we could command our tempers--I was the hottest of the two, when we
were boys; but seeing something of the world, abroad and at home, has
done wonders for me. If you could coolly pursue this business as I
wish, in the comic rather than the heroic style, we might still, though
rivals, be friends--very good friends."

"No, my lord, no: here all friendship between us ends." "Be it so," said
Lord Mowbray: "then sworn foes instead of sworn friends--and open war is
the word!"

"Open war!--yes--better than hollow peace."

"Then a truce for to-day; to-morrow, with your good leave, I enter the
lists."

"When you please, my lord."

"Fearful odds, I own. The first flourish of trumpets, by that trumpeter
of yours, Jacob, has been in favour of the champion of the Jew pedlars;
and the lady with bright Jewish eyes has bowed to her knight, and he has
walked the field triumphantly alone; but Mowbray--Lord Mowbray appears!
Farewell, Harrington!"

He bowed, laughing, and left me. 'Twas well he did; I could not have
borne it another second, and I could not insult the man in my own
house--anger, disdainful anger, possessed me. My heart had, in the
course of a few hours, been successively a prey to many violent
conflicting passions; and at the moment when I most wanted the support,
the sympathy of a friend, I found myself duped, deserted, ridiculed! I
felt alone in the world, and completely miserable.

A truce for this day was agreed upon. I had a few hours' time for
reflection--much wanted. During this interval, which appeared to me a
most painful suspense, I had leisure to reconsider my difficulties.
Now that I was left to my own will entirely, should I decide to make an
immediate declaration? As I revolved this question in my thoughts, my
mind altered with every changing view which the hopes and fears of a
lover threw upon the subject. I was not perfectly well informed as
to the material point, whether the Jewish religion and Jewish customs
permitted intermarriages with Christians. Mowbray's levity had suggested
alarming doubts: perhaps he had purposely thrown them out; be that as
it would, I must be satisfied. I made general inquiries as to the Jewish
customs from Jacob, and he, careful to answer with propriety, kept also
to general terms, lest he should appear to understand my particular
views: he could tell me only, that in some cases, more frequently on the
continent and in America than in England, Jews have married Christian
women, and the wives have continued undisturbed in their faith; whether
such marriages were regularly permitted or not, Jacob could not say--no
precedent that he could recollect was exactly a case in point. This
difficulty concerning religion increased, instead of diminishing, in
magnitude and importance, the more my imagination dwelt upon it--the
longer it was considered by my reason: I must take more time before I
could determine. Besides, I was _curious_--I would not allow that I was
_anxious_--to see how Miss Montenero would conduct herself towards
Lord Mowbray--a man of rank--a man of fashion--supposed to be a man
of fortune--known to be a man of wit and gallantry: I should have an
opportunity, such as I had never before had, of seeing her tried; and I
should be able to determine whether I had really obtained any interest
in her heart. On this last point particularly, I could now, without
hazard of a mortifying refusal, or of a precipitate engagement, decide.
Add to these distinct reasons, many mixed motives, which acted upon me
without my defining or allowing them in words. I had spoken and thought
with contempt of Lord Mowbray's chance of success; but in spite of my
pride in my own superiority of principle and character, in spite of
my confidence in Berenice and in myself, I had my secret, very secret,
quailings of the heart. I thought, when it came to the point, that
it would be best to wait a little longer, before I hazarded that
declaration which must bring her to direct acceptance or rejection; in
short, I determined not to throw myself at her feet precipitately. I
took Mowbray's advice after all; but I took it when I had made it my own
opinion: and still I rejoiced that my resistance to the arrogant manner
in which Lord Mowbray had laid down the law of gallantry, had produced
that struggle of the passions, in the height of which his mask had
fallen off. I never could decide whether the thought of becoming my
rival really struck him, as he said it did, from the pique of the
moment; or whether he only seized the occasion to declare a design he
had previously formed: no matter--we were now declared rivals.



CHAPTER 13 

After our declaration of hostilities, Lord Mowbray and I first met on
neutral ground at the Opera--Miss Montenero was there. We were both
eager to mark our pretensions to her publicly. I appeared this night to
great disadvantage: I certainly did not conduct myself prudently--I
lost the command of my temper. Lord Mowbray met me with the same
self-possession, the same gay, careless manner which had provoked me so
much during our last interview. To the by-standers, who knew nothing of
what had passed between us, his lordship must have appeared the pink of
courtesy, the perfection of gentlemanlike ease and good-humour; whilst
I, unable to suppress symptoms of indignation, of contempt, and perhaps
of jealousy, appeared, in striking contrast, captious, haughty, and at
best incomprehensible. Mr. Montenero looked at me with much surprise,
and some concern. In Miss Montenero's countenance I thought I saw more
concern than surprise; she was alarmed--she grew pale, and I repented of
some haughty answer I had made to Lord Mowbray, in maintaining a place
next to her, which he politely ceded to my impetuosity: he seated
himself on the other side of her, in a place which, if I had not been
blinded by passion, I might have seen and taken as quietly as he did. I
was more and more vexed by perceiving that Mr. Montenero appeared to be,
with all his penetration, duped this night by Mowbray's show of kindness
towards me; he whispered once or twice to Mr. Montenero, and they seemed
as if they were acting in concert, both observing that I was out of
temper, and Lord Mowbray showing Mr. Montenero how he bore with me. In
fact, I desired nothing so much as an opportunity of quarrelling with
him, and he, though determined to put me ostensibly and flagrantly in
the wrong, desired nothing better than to commence his operation by
the eclat of a duel. If Miss Montenero had understood her business as a
heroine, a duel, as every body expected, must have taken place between
us, in consequence of the happy dispositions in which we both were this
night: nothing but the presence of mind and unexpected determination
of Miss Montenero could have prevented it. I sat regretting that I
had given a moment's pain or alarm to her timid sensibility, while I
observed the paleness of her cheek, and a tremor in her under lip, which
betrayed how much she had been agitated. Some talking lady of the party
began to give an account, soon afterwards, of a duel in high life,
which was then the conversation of the day: Lord Mowbray and I were
both attentive, and so was Miss Montenero. When she observed that our
attention was fixed, and when there was a pause in the conversation
in which her low voice could be distinctly heard, she, conquering her
extreme timidity, and with a calmness that astonished us all, said, that
she did not pretend to be a judge of what gentlemen might think right
or wrong about duels, but that for her own part she had formed a
resolution--an unalterable resolution, never to marry a man who had
fought a duel in which he had been the challenger. Her father, who
was behind her, leaned forward, and asked what his daughter said--she
deliberately repeated her words.

That instant I recovered perfect command of temper--I resolved that at
all events I never would be the person to give the challenge, and Lord
Mowbray, at the same instant, I believe, resolved that I should, if he
could so manage it without appearing to be the aggressor. We were both
of us firmly convinced that Miss Montenero was in earnest; the manner
in which she spoke, and the strong evidence of her power over herself at
this moment, impressed us completely with this conviction. A young lady,
a stranger in London, averse from appearing, infinitely more averse
from speaking before numbers, who, when all eyes, and some of them no
friendly eyes, were fixed upon her, could so far conquer her excessive
susceptibility to the opinion of others, as to pronounce, in such
circumstances, such a new and extraordinary determination, was certainly
to be deemed capable of abiding by her resolution. She was much blamed,
I heard afterwards, for the resolution, and more for the declaration. It
was said to be "quite unfit for a lady, and particularly for so young a
lady. Till swords were actually drawn, she should never have thought
of such a thing: then, to presume that she or her fortune were of such
consequence, that her declaration could influence gentlemen--could have
any effect on Lord Mowbray! He did her a vast deal too much honour
in paying her any of those attentions which every body knew meant
nothing--a Jewess, too!"

Miss Montenero never afterwards spoke on the subject; the effect she
desired was produced, and no other power, I am persuaded, could have
been sufficient to have made me preserve command of myself, during my
daily, hourly trials of temper, in those contentions for her favour
which ensued. Lord Mowbray, by every secret art that could pique my
pride, my jealousy, or my love, endeavoured to provoke me to challenge
him. At first this struggle in my mind was violent--I had reason to fear
my rival's address, and practised powers of pleasing. He used his utmost
skill, and that skill was great. He began by exerting all his wit,
humour, and vivacity, to entertain in conversation; while I, with a
spell over my faculties, could not produce to advantage any one thing
I knew or had ever known. What became of my ideas I know not, but I
was sensible of my being very stupid and disagreeable. Aware of the
contrast, aware that Miss Montenero saw and felt it, I grew ten times
worse, more silent, and more stupid. Mowbray, happy and confident, went
on, secure of victory. He was an excellent actor, and he was now to act
falling in love, which he did by such fine degrees, and with a nicety
of art which so exquisitely imitated nature, that none but the most
suspicious or the most practised could have detected the counterfeit.
From being the most entertaining, lively man in London, Lord Mowbray
became serious, grave, and sentimental. From being a gallant, gay
Lothario, he was reformed, likely to make the best husband in the world,
provided he marry the woman he loves, and who has influence over him
sufficient to make his reformation last for life. This Lord Mowbray, in
every possible form of insinuation, gave Miss Montenero to understand
was precisely her case and his; she had first, he said, given him
a taste for refined female society, disgusted him with his former
associates, especially with the women of whom he could not now bear
to think; he had quarrelled with--parted with all his mistresses--his
Jessica, the best beloved--parted from irrevocably. This was dropped
with propriety in conversation with Mr. Montenero. The influence of a
virtuous attachment is well known. The effects on Lord Mowbray were,
as he protested, wonderful; he scarcely knew himself--indeed I scarcely
knew him, though I had been, as it were, behind the scenes, and had seen
him preparing for his character. Though he knew that I knew that he was
acting, yet this never disconcerted him in the slightest degree--never
gave him one twinge of conscience, or hesitation from shame, in my
presence. Whenever I attempted openly--I was too honourable, and he
knew I was too honourable, to betray his confidence, or to undermine him
secretly--whenever I attempted openly to expose him, he foiled me--his
cunning was triumphant, and the utmost I could accomplish was, in
the acme of my indignation, to keep my temper, and recollect Miss
Montenero's resolution.

Though she seemed not at first in the least to suspect Lord Mowbray's
sincerity, she was, as I rejoiced to perceive, little interested by his
professions: she was glad he was reformed, for his sake; but for her own
part, her vanity was not flattered. There seemed to be little chance
on this plea of persuading her to take charge of him for life. My heart
beat again with hope--how I admired her!--and I almost forgave Lord
Mowbray. My indignation against him, I must own, was not always as
steadily proportioned to his deserts as for the sake of my pride and
consistency I could wish to represent it. In recording this part of the
history of my life, truth obliges me to acknowledge that my anger rose
or fell in proportion to the degree of fear I felt of the possibility of
his success; whenever my hope and my confidence in myself increased, I
found it wonderfully easy to command my temper.

But my rival was a man of infinite resource; when one mode of attack
failed, he tried another. Vanity, in some form, he was from experience
convinced must be the ruling passion of the female heart--and vanity
is so accessible, so easily managed. Miss Montenero was a stranger, a
Jewess, just entering into the fashionable world--just doubting, as
he understood, whether she should make London her future residence, or
return to her retirement in the wilds of America. Lord Mowbray wished
to make her sensible that his public attentions would bring her at once
into fashion; and though his mother, the prejudiced Lady De Brantefield,
could not be prevailed upon to visit a Jewess, yet his lordship had a
vast number of high connexions and relations, to all of whom he
could introduce Mr. and Miss Montenero. Lady Anne Mowbray, indeed,
unaccountably persisted in saying every where, that she was certain
her brother had no more thought of the Jewess than of the queen of the
gipsies. Whenever she saw Miss Montenero in public, her ladyship had,
among her own set, a never-failing source of sarcasm and ridicule in
the Spanish fashion of Miss Montenero's dress, especially her long
veils--veils were not then in fashion, and Lady Anne of course
pronounced them to be hideous. It was at this time, in England,
the reign of high heads: a sort of triangular cushion or edifice of
horsehair, suppose nine inches diagonal, three inches thick, by seven
in height, called I believe a _toque_ or a _system_, was fastened on the
female head, I do not well know how, with black pins a quarter of a
yard long; and upon and over this _system_, the hair was erected, and
crisped, and frizzed, and thickened with soft pomatum, and filled with
powder, white, brown, or red, and made to look as like as possible to
a fleece of powdered wool, which _battened_ down on each side of the
triangle to the face. Then there were things called _curls_--nothing
like what the poets understand by curls or ringlets, but layers of hair,
first stiffened and then rolled up into hollow cylinders, resembling
sausages, which were set on each side of the system, "artillery tier
above tier," two or three of the sausages dangling from the ear down
the neck. The hair behind, natural and false, plastered together to
a preposterous bulk with quantum sufficit of powder and pomatum, was
turned up in a sort of great bag, or club, or _chignon_--then at the top
of the mount of hair and horsehair was laid a gauze platform, stuck full
of little red daisies, from the centre of which platform rose a plume
of feathers a full yard high--or in lieu of platform, flowers, and
feathers, there was sometimes a fly-cap, or a wing-cap, or a _pouf_. If
any one happens to have an old pocket-book for 1780, a single glance
at the plate of fashionable heads for that year will convey a more
competent idea of the same than I, unknowing in the terms of art, can
produce by the most elaborate description. Suffice it for me to observe,
that in comparison with this head-dress, to which, in my liberality and
respect for departed fashion, I forbear to fix any of the many epithets
which present themselves, the Spanish dress and veil worn by Miss
Montenero, associated as it was with painting and poetry, did certainly
appear to me more picturesque and graceful. In favour of the veil, I
had all the poets, from Homer and Hesiod downwards, on my side; and
moreover, I was backed by the opinion of the wisest of men, who has
pronounced that "_a veil addeth to beauty._" Armed with such authority,
and inspired by love, I battled stoutly with Lady Anne upon several
occasions, especially one night when we met at the Pantheon. I was
walking between Lady Emily B---- and Miss Montenero, and two or three
times, as we went round the room, we met Lady Anne Mowbray and her
party, and every time we passed, I observed scornful glances at the
veil. Berenice was too well-bred to suspect ill-breeding in others;
she never guessed what was going forward, till one of the youngest and
boldest of these high-born vulgarians spoke so loud as she passed, and
pronounced the name of _Montenero,_ and the word _Jewess,_ so plainly,
that both Miss Montenero and Lady Emily B---- could not avoid hearing
what was said. Lord Mowbray was not with us. I took an opportunity of
quitting the ladies as soon as general B----, who had left us for a few
minutes, returned. I went to pay my compliments to Lady Anne Mowbray,
and, as delicately as I could, remonstrated against their proceedings.
I said that her ladyship and her party were not aware, I was sure, how
loudly they had spoken. Lady Anne defended herself and her companions
by fresh attacks upon the veil, and upon the lady, "who had done vastly
well to take the veil." In the midst of the nonsense which Lady Anne
threw out, there now and then appeared something that was a little like
her brother Mowbray's wit--little bits of sparkling things, _mica,_
not ore. I was in no humour to admire them, and her ladyship took much
offence at a general observation I made, "that people of sense submit to
the reigning fashion, while others are governed by it." We parted this
night so much displeased with each other, that when we met again in
public, we merely exchanged bows and curtsies--in private we had seldom
met of late--I never went to Lady de Brantefield's. I was really glad
that the battle of the veil had ended in this cessation of intercourse
between us. As soon as Miss Montenero found that her Spanish dress
subjected her to the inconvenience of being remarked in public she laid
it aside. I thought she was right in so doing--and in three days' time,
though I had at first regretted the picturesque dress, I soon became
accustomed to the change. So easily does the eye adapt itself to the
fashion, so quickly do we combine the idea of grace and beauty with
whatever is worn by the graceful and the beautiful, and I may add, so
certainly do we learn to like whatever is associated with those we love.

The change of dress which Berenice had so prudently adopted, did not,
however, produce any change in the manners of Lady Anne and of her
party. Lady Anne, it was now evident, had taken an unalterable dislike
to Miss Montenero. I am not coxcomb enough to imagine that she was
jealous; I know that she never had the slightest regard for me, and
that I was not the sort of man whom she could like; but still I had been
counted, perhaps by others, in the list of her admirers, and I was a
young man, and an admirer the less was always to be regretted--deserting
to a _Jewess_, as she said, was intolerable. But I believe she was also
secretly afraid, that her brother was more in earnest in his attentions
to Miss Montenero, than she affected to suppose possible. From whatever
cause, she certainly hated Berenice cordially, and took every means of
mortifying me by the display of this aversion. I shall not be at the
trouble of recording the silly and petty means she took to vex. I was
not surprised at any thing of this sort from her ladyship; but I was
much surprised by her brother's continuing to be absolutely blind and
deaf to her proceedings. It is true, sometimes it happened that he was
not present, but this was not always the case; and I was convinced that
it could not be from accident or inadvertency, that it must be from
settled design, that he persisted in this blindness. Combining my
observations, I discovered that he wanted to make Miss Montenero
feel how impossible it was for her to escape the ridicule of certain
_fashionable impertinents_, and how impracticable it would be to
_get on_ among people of the ton in London, without the aid of such a
champion as himself. One day he suddenly appeared to discover something
of what was going forward, and assumed great indignation; then affecting
to suppress that feeling, "wished to Heaven he were _authorized_
to speak"--and there he paused--but no inclination to authorize him
appeared. I had sometimes seen Miss Montenero distressed by the rude
manner in which she had been stared at. I had seen her colour come and
go, but she usually preserved a dignified silence on such occasions.
Once, and but once, I heard her advert to the subject in speaking to
her father, when Lord Mowbray was not present. "You see, I hope, my
dear father," said she, "that I am curing myself of that _morbid
sensibility_, that excessive susceptibility to the opinion of others,
with which you used to reproach me. I have had some good lessons, and
you have had some good trials of me, since we came to England."

"How much I am obliged to those persons or those circumstances, which
have done what I thought was impossible, which have raised my daughter
in my opinion!" said her father. The look of affectionate approbation
with which these words were pronounced, and the grateful delight with
which Berenice heard them, convinced me that Lord Mowbray had completely
mistaken his ground--had mistaken strong sensibility for weakness of
mind. It now appeared, to my entire satisfaction, that Miss Montenero
was really and truly above the follies and the meanness of fashion.
She did not wish to be acquainted with these fine people, nor to make a
figure in public; but she did wish to see the best society in London,
in order to compare it with what she had been accustomed to in other
countries, and to determine what would be most for her future happiness.
Through the friendship of General B---- and his family, she had
sufficient opportunities of seeing in public, and enjoying in private,
the best society in London. Lord Mowbray, therefore, had no power over
her, as a leader of fashion; his general character for being a favourite
with the ladies, and his gallant style of conversation, did not make the
impression upon her that he had expected.

He did not know how to converse with one who could not be answered by
a play upon words, nor satisfied by an appeal to precedents, or the
authority of numbers and of high names.

Lord Chesterfield's style of conversation, and that of any of the
personages in Xenophon's Cyropaedia, could not be more different, or
less compatible, than the simplicity of Miss Montenero and the wit of
Lord Mowbray.

I never saw any one so puzzled and provoked as was this man of wit by a
character of genuine simplicity. He was as much out of his element with
such a character as any of the French lovers in Marmontel's Tales would
be tte--tte with a Roman or a Grecian matron--as much at a loss as
one of the fine gentlemen in Congreve's plays might find himself, if
condemned to hold parley with a heroine of Sophocles or of Euripides.

Lord Mowbray, a perfect Proteus when he wished to please, changed his
manner successively from that of the sentimental lover, to that of the
polite gallant and accomplished man of the world; and when this did
not succeed, he had recourse to philosophy, reason, and benevolence. No
hint, which cunning and address could improve to his purpose, was lost
upon Mowbray. Mrs. Coates had warned me that Miss Montenero was _touchy
on the Jewish chapter_, and his lordship was aware it was as the
champion of the Jews that I had first been favourably represented by
Jacob, and favourably received by Mr. Montenero. Soon Lord Mowbray
appeared to be deeply interested and deeply read in very thing that had
been written in their favour.

He rummaged over Tovey and Ockley; and "Priestley's Letters to the
Jews," and "The Letters of certain Jews to M. de Voltaire," were books
which he now continually quoted in conversation. With great address he
wondered that he had never happened to meet with them till lately; and
confessed that he believed he never should have thought of reading
them, but that really the subject had of late become so interesting! Of
Voltaire's illiberal attacks upon the Jews, and of the King of Prussia's
intolerance towards them, he could not express sufficient detestation;
nor could he ever adequately extol Cumberland's benevolent "Jew," or
Lessing's "Nathan the Wise." Quotations from one or the other were
continually in readiness, uttered with all the air of a man so deeply
impressed with certain sentiments, that they involuntarily burst from
him on every occasion. This I could also perceive to be an imitation of
what he had seen _suceed_ with me; and I was not a little flattered by
observing, that Berenice was unconsciously pleased, if not caught by the
counterfeit. The affectation was skilfully managed, with a dash of
his own manner, and through the whole preserving an air of nature
and consistency: so that he had all the appearance of a person whose
understanding, naturally liberal, had, on one particular subject, been
suddenly warmed and exalted by the passion of love. It has often been
said, that liars have need of good memories. Mowbray had really an
excellent memory, but yet it was not sufficient for all his occasions.
He contradicted himself sometimes without perceiving it, but not without
its being perceived. Intent upon one point, he laboured that admirably;
but he sometimes forgot that any thing could be seen beyond that
point--he forgot the bearings and connexions. He never forgot his
liberality about the Jews, and about every thing relative to Hebrew
ground; but on other questions, in which he thought Mr. Montenero and
his daughter had no concern, his party spirit and his want of toleration
for other sects broke out.

One day a Rabbi came to Mr. Montenero's while we were there, to solicit
his contribution towards the building or repairing a synagogue. The
priest was anxious to obtain leave to build on certain lands which
belonged to the crown. These lands were in the county where Lord
Mowbray's or Lady de Brantefield's property lay. With the most engaging
liberality of manner, Lord Mowbray anticipated the wishes of the Jewish
priest, declaring that he was happy on this occasion publicly and
practically to show his principles of toleration; he would immediately
use whatever influence he might possess with government to obtain the
desired grant; and if that application should fail, there was still a
resource in future. At present, unfortunately, his mother's opinions
differing from his own, nothing could be done; but he could, in future,
offer a site for a synagogue in the very part of the country that was
desired, on lands that must in time be his.

The priest was down to the ground, bowing, full of acknowledgments, and
admiration of his lordship's generosity and liberality of principle. A
few minutes afterwards, however, his lordship undid all he had done
with Berenice and with her father, by adding that he regretted that his
mother had given a lease of a bit of land to some confounded dissenters:
he was determined, he said, whenever the estate should come into his
own hands, to break that lease--he would have no meeting-house, no
dissenting chapel on his estate--he considered them as nuisances--he
would raze the chapel to the ground--he would much rather have a
synagogue on that spot.

Lord Mowbray walked to the window with the Jewish priest, who was eager
to press his own point while his lordship was in the humour.

Mowbray looked back for Mr. Montenero, but, to his evident
mortification, neither Mr. Montenero nor Berenice followed to this
consultation. Mr. Montenero turned to me, and, with a peculiar look of
his, an expression of grave humour and placid penetration, said, "Did
you ever hear, Mr. Harrington, of a sect of Jews called the Caraites?"

"Never, sir."

"The _Caraites_ are what we may call Jewish dissenters. Lord Mowbray's
notions of toleration remind me of the extraordinary liberality of one
of our Rabbies, who gave it as his opinion that if a _Caraites_ and a
Christian were drowning, we Jews ought to make a bridge of the body of
the Caraite, for the purpose of saving the Christian."

Berenice smiled; and I saw that my fears of her being duped by mock
philanthropy were vain. Lord Mowbray was soon tired of his colloquy with
the priest, and returned to us, talking of the Hebrew chanting at some
synagogue in town which he had lately visited; and which, he said, was
the finest thing he had ever heard. A Jewish festival was in a few days
to be celebrated, and I determined, I said, to go on that day to hear
the chanting, and to see the ceremony. In the countenance of Berenice,
to whom my eyes involuntarily turned as I spoke, I saw an indefinable
expression, on which I pondered, and finished by interpreting favourably
to my wishes. I settled that she was pleased, but afraid to show this
too distinctly. Lord Mowbray regretted, what I certainly did not in the
least regret, that he should be on duty at Windsor on the day of this
festival. I was the more determined to be at the synagogue, and there
accordingly I went punctually; but, to my disappointment, Berenice did
not appear. Mr. Montenero saw me come in, and made room for me near him.
The synagogue was a spacious, handsome building; not divided into
pews like our churches, but open, like foreign churches, to the whole
congregation. The women sat apart in a gallery. The altar was in the
centre, on a platform, raised several steps and railed round. Within
this railed space were the high-priest and his assistants. The
high-priest with his long beard and sacerdotal vestments, struck me as a
fine venerable figure. The service was in Hebrew: but I had a book
with a translation of it. All I recollect are the men and women's
thanksgivings.

"Blessed art thou, O Everlasting King! that thou hast not made me a
woman."

The woman's lowly response is, "Blessed art thou, O Lord! that thou hast
made me according to thy will."

But of the whole ceremony I must confess that I have but a very confused
recollection. Many things conspired to distract my attention. Whether
it was that my disappointment at not seeing Berenice indisposed me to be
pleased, or whether the chanting was not this day, or at this synagogue,
as fine as usual, it certainly did not answer my expectations. However
pleasing it might be to other ears, to mine it was discordant; and I was
afraid that Mr. Montenero should perceive this. I saw that he observed
me from time to time attentively, and I thought he wanted to discover
whether there was within me any remains of my old antipathies. Upon this
subject I knew he was peculiarly susceptible. Under this apprehension,
I did my utmost to suppress my feelings; and the constraint became
mentally and corporeally irksome. The ceremonials, which were quite new
to me, contributed at once to strain my attention, and to increase the
painful confusion of my mind. I felt relieved when the service was
over; but when I thought that it was finished, all stood still, as if
in expectation, and there was a dead silence. I saw two young children
appear from the crowd: way was made for them to the altar. They
walked slowly, hand in hand, and when they had ascended the steps,
and approached the altar, the priest threw over them a white scarf, or
vestment, and they kneeled, and raising their little hands, joined them
together, in the attitude of supplication. They prayed in silence. They
were orphans, praying for their father and mother, whom they had lately
lost. Mr. Montenero told me that it is the Jewish custom for orphans,
during a year after the death of their parents, to offer up at
the altar, on every public meeting of their synagogue, this solemn
commemoration of their loss. While the children were still kneeling, a
man walked silently round the synagogue, collecting contributions for
the orphans. I looked, and saw, as he came nearer to me, that this was
Jacob. Just as I had taken out my purse, I was struck by the sight of a
face and figure that had terrible power over my associations--a figure
exactly resembling one of the most horrible of the Jewish figures which
used to haunt me when I was a child. The face with _terrible eyes_
stood fixed opposite to me. I was so much surprised and startled by this
apparition, that a nervous tremor seized me in every limb. I let the
purse, which I had in my hand, fall upon the ground. Mr. Montenero took
it up again, and presented it to me, asking me, in a very kind voice,
"if I was ill." I recollected myself--when I looked again, the figure
had disappeared in the crowd. I had no reason to believe that Mr.
Montenero saw the cause of my disorder. He seemed to attribute it to
sudden illness, and hastened to get out of the synagogue into the fresh
air. His manner, on this occasion, was so kind towards me, and the
anxiety he showed about my health so affectionate, that all my fears of
his misinterpreting my feelings vanished; and to me the result of all
that had passed was a firmer conviction, than I had ever yet felt, of
his regard.

It was evident, I thought, that after all the disadvantages I had had
on some points, and after all the pains that Lord Mowbray had taken
to please, Mr. Montenero far preferred me, and was interested in the
highest degree about my health, and about every thing that concerned
me. Nevertheless, Lord Mowbray persevered in showing the most profound
respect for Mr. Montenero, by acting an increasing taste for his
conversation, deference for his talents, and affection for his virtues.
This certainly succeeded better with Berenice than any thing else his
lordship had tried; but when he found it please, he overdid it a little.
The exaggeration was immediately detected by Berenice: the heart easily
detects flattery. Once, when Lord Mowbray praised her father for some
accomplishment which he did not possess--for pronouncing and reading
English remarkably well--his daughter's glance at the flatterer
expressed indignation, suddenly extinguished by contempt. Detected and
baffled, he did not well know how, by a woman whom he considered as so
much his inferior in ability and address, Lord Mowbray found it often
difficult to conceal his real feelings of resentment, and then it was
that he began to hate her. I, who knew his countenance too well to
be deceived by his utmost command of face, saw the evil turn of the
eye--saw looks from time to time that absolutely alarmed me--looks of
hatred, malice, vengeance, suddenly changed to smiles, submission, and
softness of demeanour. Though extremely vain, and possessed with an
opinion that no woman could resist him, yet, with his understanding
and his experience in gallantry, I could not conceive it possible that,
after all the signs and tokens he had seen, he should persist in the
hope of succeeding; he was certainly aware that I was preferred. I knew
it to be natural that jealousy and anger should increase with fears and
doubts of success; and yet there was something incomprehensible in
the manner which, before Mr. Montenero, he now adopted towards me: he
appeared at once to yield the palm to me, and yet to be resolved not to
give up the contest; he seemed as if he was my rival against his will,
and my friend if I would but permit it; he refrained, with ostentatious
care, from giving me any provocation, checking himself often, and
drawing back with such expressions as these:--"If it were any other man
upon earth--but Mr. Harrington might say and do what he pleased--in any
other circumstances, he could not hazard contradicting or quarrelling
with _him_; indeed he could never forget--"

Then he would look at Berenice and at Mr. Montenero, and they would
look as if they particularly approved of his conduct. Berenice softened
towards him, and I trembled. As she softened towards him, I fancied she
became graver and more reserved towards me. I was more provoked by the
new tone of sentimental regret from Mowbray than I had been by any of
his other devices, because I thought I saw that it imposed more than any
thing else had done on Berenice and Mr. Montenero, and because I knew it
to be so utterly false.

Once, as we were going down stairs together, after I had disdainfully
expressed my contempt of hypocrisy, and my firm belief that my plain
truth would in the end prevail with Berenice against all his address,
he turned upon me in sudden anger, beyond his power to control, and
exclaimed, "Never!--She never shall be yours!"

It appeared as if he had some trick yet in store--some card concealed
in his hand, with which he was secure, at last, of winning the game. I
pondered, and calculated, but I could not make out what it could be.

One advantage, as he thought it, I was aware he had over me--he had no
religious scruples; he could therefore manage so as to appear to make
a great sacrifice to love, when, in fact, it would cost his conscience
nothing. One evening he began to talk of Sir Charles Grandison and
Clementina--he blamed Sir Charles Grandison; he declared, that for his
part _there was nothing he would not sacrifice to a woman he loved_.

I looked at Miss Montenero at that instant--our eyes met--she blushed
deeply--withdrew her eyes from me--and sighed. During the remainder of
the evening, she scarcely spoke to me, or looked toward me. She appeared
embarrassed; and, as I thought, displeased. Lord Mowbray was in high
spirits--he seemed resolved to advance--I retired earlier than usual.
Lord Mowbray stayed, and seized the moment to press his own suit. He
made his proposal--he offered to sacrifice religion--every thing to
love. He was refused irrevocably. I know nothing of the particulars, nor
should I have known the fact but for his own intemperance of resentment.
It was not only his vanity--his mortified, exasperated vanity--that
suffered by this refusal; it was not only on account of his rivalship
with me that he was vexed to the quick; his interest, as much as his
vanity, had suffered. I did not know till this night how completely
he was ruined. He had depended upon the fortune of the Jewess. What
resource for him now?--None. In this condition, like one of the Indian
gamblers, when they have lost all, and are ready _to run amuck_ on all
who may fall in their way, he this night, late, made his appearance at
a club where he expected to find me. Fortunately, I was not there; but a
gentleman who was, gave me an account of the scene. Disappointed at
not finding me, with whom he had determined to quarrel, he supped in
absolute silence--drank hasty and deep draughts of wine--then burst out
into abuse of Mr. and Miss Montenero, and challenged any body present
to defend them: he knew that several of their acquaintances were in
company; but all, seeing that from the combined effects of passion and
wine he was not in his senses, suffered him to exhale his fury without
interruption or contradiction. Then he suddenly demanded the reason of
this silence; and seemingly resolved to force some one into a quarrel,
[Footnote: Strange as it may appear, this representation is true.] he
began by the gentleman next to him, and said the most offensive and
provoking things he could think of to him--and to each in turn; but all
laughed, and told him they were determined not to quarrel with him--that
he must take four-and-twenty hours to cool before they would take
notice of any thing he should say. His creditors did not give him
four-and-twenty hours' time: a servant, before whom he had vented his
rage against the Jewess, comprehended that all his hopes of her were
over, and gave notice to the creditors, who kept him in their pay for
that purpose. Mowbray was obliged the next day to leave town, or to
conceal himself in London, to avoid an arrest. I heard no more of him
for some time--indeed I made no inquiries. I could have no farther
interest concerning a man who had conducted himself so ill. I only
rejoiced that he was now out of my way, and that he had by all his
treachery, and by all his artifices, given me an opportunity of seeing,
more fully tried, the excellent understanding and amiable disposition of
Berenice. My passion was now justified by my reason: my hopes were high,
not presumptuous--nothing but the difficulty about her religion stood
between me and happiness. I was persuaded that the change by which I had
been alarmed in Miss Montenero's manner towards me had arisen only
from doubts of my love, or from displeasure at the delay of an explicit
declaration of my passion. Determined, at all hazards, now to try my
fate, I took my way across the square to Mr. Montenero's--Across the
square?--yes! I certainly took the diagonal of the square.



CHAPTER 14

When I arrived at Mr. Montenero's I saw the window-shutters closed, and
there was an ominous stillness in the area--no one answered to my knock.
I knocked louder--I rang impatiently; no footsteps were heard in the
hall: I pulled the bell incessantly. During the space of three minutes
that I was forced to wait on the steps, I formed a variety of horrid
imaginations. At last I heard approaching sounds: an old woman very
deliberately opened the door. "Lauk, sir, how you do ring! There's not a
body to be had but me--all the servants is different ways, gone to their
friends."

"But Mr. and Miss Montenero--"

"Oh! they was off by times this morning--they be gone--"

"Gone?"

I suppose my look and accent of despair struck the old woman with some
pity, for she added, "Lauk, sir, they be only gone for a few days."

I recovered my breath. "And can you, my good lady, tell me where they
are gone?"

"Somewhere down in Surrey--Lord knows--I forget the names--but to
General somebody's."

"General B----'s, perhaps."

"Ay, ay,--that's it."

My imagination ran over in an instant all the general's family, the
gouty brother, and the white-toothed aide-de-camp.

"How long are they to stay at General B----'s, can you tell me, my good
lady?"

"Dear heart! I can't tell, not I's, how they'll cut and carve their
visitings--all I know is, they be to be back here in ten days or a
fortnight or so."

I put a golden memorandum, with my card, into the old woman's hand, and
she promised that the very moment Mr. and Miss Montenero should return
to town I should have notice.

During this fortnight my anxiety was increased by hearing from Mrs.
Coates, whom I accidentally met at a fruit-shop, that "Miss Montenero
was taken suddenly ill of a scarlet fever down in the country at General
B----'s, where," as Mrs. Coates added, "they could get no advice for her
at all, but a country apothecary, which was worse than nobody."

Mrs. Coates, who was not an ill-natured, though a very ill-bred woman,
observing the terrible alarm into which she had thrown me by her
intelligence, declared she was quite sorry she had _outed_ with the
news so sudden upon me. Mrs. Coates now stood full in the doorway of the
fruit-shop, so as to stop me completely from effecting my retreat; and
while her footman was stowing into her carriage the loads of fruit which
she had purchased, I was compelled to hear her go on in the following
style.

"Now, Mr. Harrington--no offence--but I couldn't have conceived it was
so re'lly over head and ears an affair with you, as by your turning as
pale as the table-cloth I see it re'lly is. For there was my son Peter,
he admired her, and the alderman was not against it; but then the Jewess
connexion was always a stumbling-block Peter could not swallow;--and as
for my Lord Mowbray, that the town talked of so much as in love with the
Jewess heiress--heiress, says I, very like, but not Jewess, I'll engage;
and, said I, from the first, he is no more in love with her than I
am. So many of them young men of the ton is always following of them
heiresses up and down for fashion or _fortin's_ sake, without caring
sixpence about them, that--I ask your pardon, Mr. Harrington--but I
thought you might, in the alderman's phrase, be _of the same kidney_;
but since I see 'tis a real downright affair of the heart, I shall make
it my business to call myself at your house to-morrow in my carriage.
No--that would look odd, and you a bachelor, and your people out o'town.
But I'll send my own footman with a message, I promise you now, let 'em
be ever so busy, if I hear any good news. No need to send if it be bad,
for ill news flies apace evermore, all the world over, as Peter says.
Tom! I say! is the fruit all in, Tom?--Oh! Mr. Harrington, don't trouble
yourself--you're too polite, but I always get into my coach best myself,
without hand or arm, except it be Tom's. A good morning, sir--I sha'n't
forget to-morrow: so live upon hope--lover's fare!--Home, Tom."

The next day, Mrs. Coates, more punctual to her word than many a more
polished person, sent as early as it was possible "to set my heart at
ease about Miss Montenero's illness, and _other_ _matters_." Mrs. Coates
enclosed in her note two letters, which her maid had received that
morning and last Tuesday. This was the way, as Mrs. Coates confessed,
that the report reached her ears. The waiting-maid's first letter had
stated "that her lady, though she did not complain, had a cold and sore
throat coming down, and this was alarming, with a spotted fever in the
neighbourhood." Mrs. Coates's maid had, in repeating the news, "turned
the sore throat into a spotted fever, or a scarlet fever, she did not
rightly know which, but both were said by the apothecary to be generally
fatal, where there was any Jewish taint in the blood."

The waiting-maid's second epistle, on which Mrs. Coates had written, "_a
sugar plum for a certain gentleman_," contained the good tidings "that
the first was all a mistake. There was no spotted fever, the general's
own man would take his Bible oath, within ten miles round--and Miss
Montenero's throat was gone off--and she was come out of her room. But
as to spirits and good looks, she had left both in St. James'-square,
Lon'on; _where her heart was, fur certain_. For since she come to the
country, never was there such a change in any living lady, young or
old--quite moped!--The general, and his aide-de-camp, and every body,
noticing it at dinner even. To be sure if it did not turn out a _match_,
which there was some doubts of, on account of the family's and the old
gentleman's particular oaths and objections, as she had an inkling of,
there would be two broken hearts. Lord forbid!--though a Jewish heart
might be harder to break than another's, yet it looked likely."

The remainder of the letter, Mrs. Coates, or her maid, had very
prudently torn off. I was now relieved from all apprehensions of spotted
fever; and though I might reasonably have doubted the accuracy of all
the intelligence conveyed by such a correspondent, yet I could not help
having a little faith in some of her observations. My hopes, at least,
rose delightfully; and with my hope, my ardent impatience to see
Berenice again. At last, the joyful notice of Mr. and Miss Montenero's
return to town was brought to me by the old woman. Mr. Montenero
admitted me the moment I called. Miss Montenero was not at home, or not
visible. I was shown into Mr. Montenero's study. The moment I
entered, the moment I saw him, I was struck with some change in his
countenance--some difference in his manner of receiving me. In what the
difference consisted, I could not define; but it alarmed me.

"Good Heavens!" I exclaimed, "is Miss Montenero ill?"

"My daughter is perfectly well, my dear sir."

"Thank Heaven! But you, sir?"

"I," said Mr. Montenero, "am also in perfect health. What alarms you?"

"I really don't well know," said I, endeavouring to laugh at myself,
and my own apprehensions; "but I thought I perceived some change in the
expression of your countenance towards me, my dear Mr. Montenero. You
must know, that all my life, my quickness of perception of the slightest
change in the countenance and manner of those I love, has ever been a
curse to me; for my restless imagination always set to work to invent
causes--and my causes, though ingenious, unluckily, seldom happened to
be the real causes. Many a vain alarm, many a miserable hour, has this
superfluous activity of imagination cost me--so I am determined to cure
myself."

At the moment I was uttering the determination, I stopped short, for I
felt that I could not keep it, on this occasion. Mr. Montenero sighed,
or I thought he sighed, and there was such an unusual degree of gravity
and deliberation in the mildness of his manner, that I could not believe
my alarm was without cause. I took the chair which he placed for me, and
we both sat down: but he looked so prepared to listen, that I could not
articulate. There was a sudden revulsion in my spirits, and all my ideas
were in utter confusion. Mr. Montenero, the kindness of whose manner was
not changed towards me, I saw pitied my confusion. He began to talk of
his excursion into the country--he spoke of General B---- and of the
whole county of Surrey. The words reached my ears, but conveyed no ideas
to my mind, except the general notion that Mr. Montenero was giving
me time to recover myself. I was grateful for the kind intention, and
somewhat encouraged by the softness of voice, and look of pity. But
still there was something so measured--so guarded--so prepared!--At
last, when he had exhausted all that he could say about the county of
Surrey, and a dead silence threatened me, I took courage, and plunged
into the middle of things at once. I cannot remember exactly the words,
but what I said was to this effect.

"Mr. Montenero, you know so much of the human heart, and of my heart,
that you must be aware of the cause of my present embarrassment and
emotion. You must have seen my passion for your incomparable daughter."

"I have seen it, I own--I am well aware of it, Mr. Harrington," replied
Mr. Montenero, in a mild and friendly tone; but there was something
of self-accusation and repentance in the tone, which alarmed me
inexpressibly.

"I hope, my dear good sir, that you do not repent of your kindness,"
said I, "in having permitted me to cultivate your society, in having
indulged me in some hours of the most exquisite pleasure I ever yet
enjoyed."

He sighed; and I went on with vehement incoherence.

"I hope you cannot suspect me of a design to abuse your confidence, to
win, if it were in my power, your daughter's affections, without your
knowledge, surreptitiously, clandestinely. She is an heiress, a rich
heiress, I know, and my circumstances--Believe me, sir, I have never
intended to deceive you; but I waited till--There I was wrong. I wish
I had abided by my own opinion! I wish I had followed my first impulse!
Believe me, sir, it was my first thought, my first wish, to speak to
you of all the circumstances; if I delayed, it was from the fear that
a precipitate declaration would have been imputed to presumption.
As Heaven is my judge, I had no other motive. I abhor artifice. I am
incapable of the base treachery of taking advantage of any confidence
reposed in me."

"My good sir," said Mr. Montenero, when at last I was forced to pause
for breath, "why this vehemence of defence? I do not accuse--I do not
suspect you of any breach of confidence. Pray compose yourself."

Calmed by this assurance, I recovered some presence of mind, and
proceeded, as I thought, in a most tranquil manner to express my regret,
at all events, that I should not have been the first person to have
explained to him my unfortunate circumstances. "But this," I said, "was
like the rest of Lord Mowbray's treacherous conduct."

I was going on again in a tone of indignation, when Mr. Montenero
again begged me to compose myself, and asked "to what unfortunate
circumstances I alluded?"

"You do not know then? You have not been informed? Then I did Lord
Mowbray injustice."

I explained to Mr. Montenero to what circumstances I had so
unintelligibly alluded. I gained courage as I went on, for I saw that
the history of my father's vow, of which Mr. Montenero had evidently
never heard till this moment, did not shock or offend him, as I had
expected that it would.

With the most philosophic calmness and benevolence, he said that he
could forgive my father for his prejudices the more readily, because he
was persuaded that if he had ever become known to my father, it would
not have been impossible to conquer this prepossession.

I sighed, for I was convinced this was a vain hope. There was some
confusion in the tenses in Mr. Montenero's sentence too, which I did not
quite like, or comprehend; he seemed as if he were speaking of a thing
that might have been possible, at some time that was now completely
past. I recollect having a painful perception of this one instant, and
the next accounting for it satisfactorily, by supposing that his foreign
idiom was the cause of his confusion of speech.

After a pause, he proceeded. "Fortune," said he, "is not an object to me
in the choice of a son-in-law: considering the very ample fortune which
my daughter will possess, I am quite at ease upon that point."

Still, though he had cleared away the two first great obstacles, I saw
there was some greater yet unnamed. I thought it was the difference of
our religion. We were both silent, and the difficulty seemed to me at
this moment greater, and more formidable, than it had ever yet appeared.
While I was considering how I should touch upon the subject, Mr.
Montenero turned to me and said, "I hate all mysteries, and yet I cannot
be perfectly explicit with you, Mr. Harrington; as far as I possibly
can, however, I will speak with openness--with sincerity, you may depend
upon it, I have always spoken, and ever shall speak. You must have
perceived that your company is particularly agreeable to me. Your
manners, your conversation, your liberal spirit, and the predilection
you have shown for my society--the politeness, the humanity, you showed
my daughter the first evening you met--and the partiality for her, which
a father's eye quickly perceived that you felt, altogether won upon
my heart. My regard for you has been strengthened and confirmed by
the temper, prudence, and generosity, I have seen you evince towards
a rival. I have studied your character, and I think I know it as
thoroughly as I esteem and value it. If I were to choose a son-in-law
after my own heart, you should be the man. Spare me your thanks--spare
me this joy," continued he; "I have now only said what it was just to
say--just to you and to myself."

He spoke with difficulty and great emotion, as he went on to say, that
he feared he had acted very imprudently for my happiness in permitting,
in encouraging me to see so much of his daughter; for an obstacle--he
feared an obstacle that--His voice almost failed.

"I am aware of it," said I.

"Aware of it?" said he, looking up at me suddenly with astonishment: he
repeated more calmly, "Aware of it? Let us understand one another, my
dear sir."

"I understand you perfectly," cried I. "I am well aware of the nature
of the obstacle. At once I declare that I can make no sacrifice, no
compromise of my religious principles, to my passion."

"You would be unworthy of my esteem if you could," said Mr. Montenero.
"I rejoice to hear this declaration unequivocally made; this is what I
expected from you."

"But," continued I, eagerly, "Miss Montenero could be secure of the free
exercise of her own religion. You know my principles of toleration--you
know my habits; and though between man and wife a difference of religion
may be in most cases a formidable obstacle to happiness, yet permit me
to hope--"

"I cannot permit you to hope," interrupted Mr. Montenero. "You are
mistaken as to the nature of the obstacle. A difference of religion
would be a most formidable objection, I grant; but we need not enter
upon that subject--that is not the obstacle to which I allude."

"Then of what nature can it be? Some base slander--Lord Mowbray--Nothing
shall prevent me!" cried I, starting up furiously.

"Gently--command yourself, and listen to reason and truth," said Mr.
Montenero, laying his hand on my arm. "Am I a man, do you think, to
listen to base slander? Or, if I had listened to any such, could I speak
to you with the esteem and confidence with which I have just spoken?
Could I look at you with the tenderness and affection which I feel for
you at this instant?"

"Oh! Mr. Montenero," said I, "you know how to touch me to the heart; but
answer me one, only one question--has Lord Mowbray any thing to do with
this, whatever it is?"

"I have not seen or heard from him since I saw you last."

"Your word is sufficient," said I. "Then I suspected him unjustly."

"Heaven forbid," said Mr. Montenero, "that I should raise suspicion in
a mind which, till now, I have always seen and thought to be above that
meanness. The torture of suspense I must inflict, but inflict not
on yourself the still worse torture of suspicion--ask me no farther
questions--I can answer none--time alone can solve the difficulty.
I have now to request that you will never more speak to me on this
subject: as soon as my own mind is satisfied, depend upon it I shall let
you know it. In the mean time I rely upon your prudence and your honour,
that you will not declare your attachment to my daughter, that you will
take no means, direct or indirect, to draw her into any engagement, or
to win her affections: in short, I wish to see you here as a friend
of mine--not a suitor of hers. If you are capable of this necessary
self-control, continue your visits; but if this effort be beyond your
power, I charge you, as you regard her happiness and your own, see her
no more. Consider well, before you decide."

I had confidence in my own strength of mind and honour; I knew that
want of resolution was not the defect of my character. Difficult as the
conditions were, I submitted to them--I promised that if Mr. Montenero
permitted me to continue my visits, I would strictly comply with all he
desired. The moment I had given this promise, I was in haste to quit the
room, lest Berenice should enter, before I had time to recover from the
excessive agitation into which I had been thrown.

Mr. Montenero followed me to the antechamber. "My daughter is not at
home--she is taking an airing in the park. One word more before we
part--one word more before we quit this painful subject," said he: "do
not, my dear young friend, waste your time, your ingenuity, in vain
conjectures--you will not discover that which I cannot impart; nor would
the discovery, if made, diminish the difficulty, or in the least add to
your happiness, though it might to your misery. It depends not on your
will to remove the obstacle--by no talents, no efforts of yours can it
be obviated: one thing, and but one, is in your power--to command your
own mind."

"Command my own mind! Oh! Mr. Montenero, how easy to say--how difficult
to command the passions--such a passion!"

"I acknowledge it is difficult, but I hope it is not impossible. We have
now an opportunity of judging of the strength of your mind, the firmness
of your resolution, and your power over yourself. Of these we must see
proofs--without these you never could be, either with my consent or
by her own choice, accepted by my daughter, even if no other obstacle
intervened.--Adieu." A bright idea, a sudden ray of hope, darted into my
mind. It might be all intended for a trial of me--there was, perhaps,
no real obstacle! But this was only the hope of an instant--it was
contradicted by Mr. Montenero's previous positive assertion. I hurried
home as fast as possible, shut myself up in my own room, and bolted the
door, that I might not be interrupted. I sat down to think--I could not
think, I could only feel. The first thing I did was, as it were, to
live the whole of the last hour over again--I recollected every word,
recalled every look, carefully to impress and record them in my memory.
I felt that I was not at that moment capable of judging, but I should
have the means, the facts, safe for a calmer hour. I repeated my
recollections many times, pausing, and forming vague and often
contradictory conjectures; then driving them all from my mind, and
resolving to think no more on this mysterious subject; but on no other
subject could I think--I sat motionless. How long I remained in this
situation I have no means of knowing, but it must have been for some
hours, for it was evening, as I remember, when I wakened to the sense of
its being necessary that I should exert myself, and rouse my faculties
from this dangerous state of abstraction. Since my father and mother had
been in the country, I had usually dined at taverns or clubs, so that
the servants had no concern with my hours of meals. My own man was much
attached to me, and I should have been tormented with his attentions,
but that I had sent him out of the way as soon as I had come home. I
then went into the park, walking there as fast and as long as I possibly
could. I returned late, quite exhausted; hoped I should sleep, and waken
with a calmer mind; but I believe I had overwalked myself, or my mind
had been overstrained--I was very feverish this night, and all the
horrors of early association returned upon me. Whenever I began to doze,
I felt the nervous oppression, the dreadful weight upon my chest--I saw
beside my bed the old figure of Simon the Jew; but he spoke to me with
the voice and in the words of Mr. Montenero. The dreams of this night
were more terrible than any reality that can be conceived; and even
when I was broad awake, I felt that I had not the command of my mind. My
early prepossessions and _antipathies_, my mother's _presentiments_,
and prophecies of evil from the connexion with the Monteneros, the
prejudices which had so long, so universally prevailed against the Jews,
occurred to me. I knew all this was unreasonable, but still the thoughts
obtruded themselves. When the light of morning returned, which I thought
never would return, I grew better.

Mr. Montenero's impressive advice, and all the kindness of his look
and manner, recurred to my mind. The whole of his conduct--the filial
affection of Berenice--the gratitude of Jacob--the attachment of
friends, who had known him for years, all assured me of his sincerity
towards myself; and the fancies, I will not call them suspicions, of the
night, were dispelled.

I was determined not to see either Mr. Montenero or Berenice for a few
days. I knew that the best thing I could do, would be to take
strong bodily exercise, and totally to change the course of my daily
occupations. There was an excellent riding-house at this time in London,
and I had been formerly in the habit of riding there. I was a favourite
with the master--he was glad to see me again. I found the exercise, and
the immediate necessity of suspending all other thoughts to attend to
the management of my horse, of sovereign use. I thus disciplined my
imagination at the time when I seemed only to be disciplining an Arabian
horse. I question whether reading Seneca, or Epictetus, or any moral
or philosophic writer, living or dead, would have as effectually
_medicined_ my mind. While I was at the riding-house, General B---- came
in with some young officers. The general, who had distinguished me with
peculiar kindness, left the young men who were with him, and walked
home with me. I refrained from asking any questions about Mr. or Miss
Montenero's visit at his house in Surrey; but he led to the subject
himself, and spoke of her having been less cheerful than usual--dwelt
on his wish that she and her father should settle in England--said there
was a young American, a relation of the Manessas, just come over; he
hoped there was no intention of returning with him to America. I felt a
terrible twinge, like what I had experienced when the general had first
mentioned his brother-in-law--perhaps, said I to myself, it may be
as vain. General B---- was going to speak further on the subject, but
though my curiosity was much raised, I thought I was bound in honour not
to obtain intelligence by any secondary means. I therefore requested the
general to let us change the subject. He tapped my shoulder: "You are
right," said he; "I understand your motives--you are right--I like your
principles."

On returning from the riding-house, I had the pleasure of hearing
that Mr. Montenero had called during my absence, and had particularly
inquired from my own man after my health.

I forgot to mention, that in one of the young officers whom I met at the
riding-house, I recognized a schoolfellow, that very little boy, who,
mounted upon the step-ladder on the day of Jacob's election, turned the
election in his favour by the anecdote of the silver pencil-case. My
little schoolfellow, now a lath of a young man, six feet high, was glad
to meet me again, and to talk over our schoolboy days. He invited me to
join him and some of his companions, who were going down to the country
on a fishing party. They promised themselves great sport in dragging a
fish-pond. I compelled myself to join this party for the mere purpose
of changing the course of my thoughts. For three days I was hurried from
place to place, and not a single thing that I liked to do did I do--I
was completely put out of my own way--my ideas were forced into new
channels. I heard of nothing but of fishing and fishing-tackle--of the
pleasures there would be in the shooting season--of shooting-jackets,
and powder-horns, and guns, and _proof_ guns. All this was terribly
irksome at the time, and yet I was conscious that it was of service to
me, and I endured it with heroic patience.

I was heartily glad when I got back to town. When I felt that I was able
to bear the sight of Berenice, I went again to Mr. Montenero's. From
that hour I maintained my resolution, I strictly adhered to my promise,
and I felt that I was rewarded by Mr. Montenero's increasing esteem
and affection. My conversation was now addressed chiefly to him, and I
remarked that I was always the chief object of his attention. I observed
that Berenice was much paler, and not in such good spirits as formerly:
she was evidently under great constraint and anxiety, and the
expression of her countenance towards me was changed; there was an
apprehensiveness, which she in vain endeavoured to calm--her attention
to whatever I was saying or doing, even when she appeared to be occupied
with other things, was constant. I was convinced that I was continually
in her thoughts; I felt that I was not indifferent to her: yet the
expression of her countenance was changed--it was not love--or it
was love strongly repressed by fear--by fear!--was it of her father's
disapprobation? I had been assured by Mr. Montenero, in whom I had
perfect confidence, that no power of mine could remove the obstacle,
if it existed--then his advice was wise not to waste my thoughts and
spirits in vain conjectures. As far as it was in human nature, I took
his advice, repressed my curiosity, and turned my thoughts from that
too interesting subject. I know not how long I should have maintained
my fortitude in this passive state of forbearance. Events soon called me
again into active exertion.



CHAPTER 15

Party spirit, in politics, ran very high about this time in London--it
was in the year 1780. The ill success of the American war had put the
people in ill-humour; they were ready to believe any thing against the
ministry, and some who, for party purposes, desired to influence the
minds of the people, circulated the most ridiculous reports, and excited
the most absurd terrors. The populace were made to believe that the
French and the papists were secret favourites of government: a French
invasion, the appearance of the French in London, is an old story almost
worn out upon the imaginations of the good people of England; but now
came a new if not a more plausible bugbear--the Pope! It was confidently
affirmed that the Pope would soon be in London, he having been seen in
disguise in a gold-flowered nightgown on _St. James's_ parade at Bath.
A poor gentleman, who appeared at his door in his nightgown, had been
actually taken by the Bath mob for the Pope; and they had pursued him
with shouts, and hunted him, till he was forced to scramble over a wall
to escape from his pursuers.

Ludicrous as this may appear, the farce, we all know, soon turned to
tragedy. From the smallest beginnings, the mischief grew and spread;
half-a-dozen people gathered in one street, and began the cry of "No
popery!--no papists!--no French!"--The idle joined the idle, and the
discontented the discontented, and both were soon drawn in to assist
the mischievous; and the cowardly, surprised at their own prowess,
when joined with numbers, and when no one opposed them, grew bolder and
bolder. Monday morning Mr. Strachan was insulted; Lord Mansfield treated
it as a slight irregularity. Monday evening Lord Mansfield himself
was insulted by the mob, they pulled down his house, and burnt his
furniture. Newgate was attacked next; the keeper went to the Lord Mayor,
and, at his return, he found the prison in a blaze; that night the
Fleet, and the King's Bench prisons, and the popish chapels, were
on fire, and the glare of the conflagration reached the skies. I was
heartily glad my father and mother were safe in the country.

Mr. Montenero and Berenice were preparing to go to a villa in Surrey,
which he had just purchased; but they apprehended no danger for
themselves, as they were inoffensive strangers, totally unconnected
with party or politics. The fury of the mob had hitherto been directed
chiefly against papists, or persons supposed to favour their cause. The
very day before Mr. Montenero was to leave town, without any conceivable
reason, suddenly a cry was raised against the Jews: unfortunately, Jews
rhymed to shoes: these words were hitched into a rhyme, and the cry
was, "_No Jews, no wooden shoes_!" Thus, without any natural, civil,
religious, moral, or political connexion, the poor Jews came in
remainder to the ancient anti-Gallican antipathy felt by English feet
and English fancies against the French wooden shoes. Among the London
populace, however, the Jews had a respectable body of friends, female
friends of noted influence in a mob--the orange-women--who were most
of them bound by gratitude to certain opulent Jews. It was then, and I
believe it still continues to be, a customary mode of charity with the
Jews to purchase and distribute large quantities of oranges among the
retail sellers, whether Jews or Christians. The orange-women were thus
become their staunch friends. One of them in particular, a warm-hearted
Irishwoman, whose barrow had, during the whole season, been continually
replenished by Mr. Montenero's bounty, and by Jacob's punctual care, now
took her station on the steps of Mr. Montenero's house; she watched her
opportunity, and when she saw _the master_ appear in the hall, she left
her barrow in charge with her boy, came up the steps, walked in, and
addressed herself to him thus, in a dialect and tone as new, almost to
me, as they seemed to be to Mr. Montenero.

"Never fear, jewel!--Jew as you have this day the misfortune to be,
you're the best Christian any way ever I happened on! so never fear,
honey, for yourself nor your daughter, God bless her! Not a soul shall
go near yees, nor a finger be laid on her, good or bad. Sure I know them
all--not a mother's son o' the _boys_ but I can call my frind--not a
captain or lader that's in it, but I can lade, dear, to the devil and
back again, if I'd but whistle: so only you keep quite, and don't be
advertising yourself any way for a Jew, nor be showing your cloven
_fut_, with or without the wooden shoes. _Keep ourselves to ourselves_,
for I'll tell you a bit of a sacret--I'm a little bit of a cat'olic
myself, all as one as what _they_ call a _papish_; but I keep it to
myself, and nobody's the wiser nor the worse--they'd tear me to pieces,
may be, did they suspect _the like_, but I keep never minding, and you,
jewel, do the like. They call you a Levite, don't they? then I, the
Widow Levy, has a good right to advise ye; we were all brothers and
sisters once--no offence--in the time of Adam, sure, and we should help
one another in all times. 'Tis my turn to help _yees_ now, and, by the
blessing, so I will--accordingly I'll be sitting all day and night,
mounting guard on your steps there without. And little as you may think
of me, the devil a guardian angel better than myself, only just the
Widow Levy, such as ye see!"

The Widow Levy took her stand, and kept her word. I stayed at Mr.
Montenero's all day, saw every thing that passed, and had frequent
opportunities of admiring her address.

She began by making the footman take down "the outlandish name from
off the door; for no name at all, sure, was better _nor_ a foreign name
these times." She charged the footman to "say _sorrow_ word themselves
to the mob for their lives, in case they would come; but to lave it all
entirely to her, that knew how to spake to _them_. For see!" said she,
aside to me--"For see! them powdered numskulls would spoil all--they'd
be taking it too high or too low, and never hit the right _kay_, nor
mind when to laugh or cry in the right place; moreover, when they'd
get _frighted_ with a cross-examination, they'd be apt to be _cutting_
themselves. Now, the ould one himself, if he had me _on the table_ even,
I'd defy to get the truth out of me, if not convanient, and I in the
sarvice of a frind."

In the pleasure of telling a few superfluous lies it seemed to be
necessary that our guardian angel should be indulged; and there she sat
on the steps quite at ease, smoking her pipe, or wiping and _polishing_
her oranges. As parties of the rioters came up, she would parley and
jest with them, and by alternate wit and humour, and blunder, and
bravado, and flattery, and _fabling_, divert their spirit of mischief,
and forward them to distant enterprise. In the course of the day, we
had frequent occasion to admire her intrepid ingenuity and indefatigable
zeal. Late at night, when all seemed perfectly quiet in this part of the
town, she, who had never stirred from her post all day, was taken into
the kitchen by the servants to eat some supper. While she was away,
I was standing at an open window of the drawing-room, watching and
listening--all was silence; but suddenly I heard a shriek, and two
strange female figures appeared from the corner of the square, hurrying,
as if in danger of pursuit, though no one followed them. One was in
black, with a hood, and a black cloak streaming behind; the other in
white, neck and arms bare, head full dressed, with high feathers blown
upright. As they came near the window at which I stood, one of the
ladies called out, "Mr. Harrington! Mr. Harrington! For Heaven's sake
let us in!"

"Lady Anne Mowbray's voice! and Lady de Brantefield!" cried I.

Swiftly, before I could pass her, Berenice ran down stairs,
unlocked--threw open the hall-door, and let them in. Breathless,
trembling so that they could not speak, they sunk upon the first seat
they could reach; the servants hearing the hall-door unchained, ran into
the hall, and when sent away for water, the three footmen returned
with each something in his hand, and stood with water and salvers as
a pretence to satisfy their curiosity; along with them came the
orange-woman, who, wiping her mouth, put in her head between the
footmen's elbows, and stood listening, and looking at the two ladies
with no friendly eye. She then worked her way round to me, and twitching
my elbow, drew me back, and whispered--"What made ye let 'em in? Take
care but one's a mad woman, and t'other a bad woman." Lady Anne, who had
by this time drank water, and taken hartshorn, and was able to speak,
was telling, though in a very confused manner, what had happened. She
said that she had been dressed for the opera--the carriage was at the
door--her mother, who was to set her down at Lady Somebody's, who was to
_chaperon_ her, had just put on her hood and cloak, and was coming down
stairs, when they heard a prodigious noise of the mob in the street.
The mob had seized their carriage--and had found in one of the pockets
a string of beads, which had been left there by the Portuguese
ambassador's lady, whom Lady De Brantefield had taken home from chapel
the preceding day. The mob had seen the carriage stop at the chapel,
and the lady and her confessor get into it; and this had led to the
suspicion that Lady de Brantefield was a catholic, or in their language,
a concealed _papist_.

On searching the carriage farther, they had found a breviary, and one
of them had read aloud the name of a priest, written in the beginning
of the book--a priest whose name was peculiarly obnoxious to some of the
leaders.

As soon as they found the breviary, and the rosary, and this priest's
name, the mob grew outrageous, broke the carriage, smashed the windows
of the house, and were bursting open the door, when, as Lady Anne told
us, she and her mother, terrified almost out of their senses, escaped
through the back door _just in the dress they were_, and made their way
through the stables, and a back lane, and a cross street: still hearing,
or fancying they heard, the shouts of the mob, they had run on without
knowing how, or where, till they found themselves in this square, and
saw me at the open window.

"What is it? Tell me, dear," whispered the orange-woman, drawing me back
behind the footman. "Tell me, for I can't understand her for looking
at the figure of her. Tell me plain, or it may be the ruen of yees all
before ye'd know it."

I repeated Lady Anne's story, and from me the orange-woman understood
it; and it seemed to alarm her more than any of us.

"But are they _Romans?_" (Roman Catholics) said she. "How is that, when
they're not Irish!--for I'll swear to their not being Irish, tongue or
pluck. I don't believe but they're impostors--no right _Romans_, sorrow
bit of the likes; but howsomdever, no signs of none following them
yet--thanks above! Get rid on 'em any way as smart as ye can, dear; tell
Mr. Montenero."

As all continued perfectly quiet, both in the back and front of the
house, we were in hopes that they would not be pursued or discovered
by the mob. We endeavoured to quiet and console them with this
consideration; and we represented that, if the mob should break
into their house, they would, after they had searched and convinced
themselves that the obnoxious priest was not concealed there, disperse
without attempting to destroy or pillage it "Then," said Lady de
Brantefield, rising, and turning to her daughter, "Lady Anne, we had
better think of returning to our own house."

Though well aware of the danger of keeping these suspected ladies
this night, and though our guardian angel repeatedly twitched us,
reiterating, "Ah! let 'em go--don't be keeping 'em!" yet Mr. Montenero
and Berenice pressed them, in the kindest and most earnest manner,
to stay where they were safe. Lady Anne seemed most willing, Lady de
Brantefield most unwilling to remain; yet her fears struggled with her
pride, and at last she begged that a servant might be sent to her house
to see how things were going on, and to order chairs for her, if their
return was practicable.

"Stop!" cried the orange-woman, laying a strong detaining hand on the
footman's arm; "stop you--'tis I'll go with more sense--and speed."

"What is that person--that woman?" cried Lady de Brantefield, who now
heard and saw the orange-woman for the first time.

"Woman!--is it me she manes?" said the orange-woman, coming forward
quite composedly, shouldering on her cloak.

"Is it who I am?--I'm the Widow Levy.--Any commands?"

"How did she get in?" continued Lady de Brantefield, still with a look
of mixed pride and terror: "how did she get in?"

"Very asy!--through the door--same way you did, my lady, if ye had your
senses. Where's the wonder? But what commands?--don't be keeping of me."

"Anne!--Lady Anne!--Did she follow us in?" said Lady de Brantefield.

"Follow yees!--not I!--no follower of yours nor the likes. But what
commands, nevertheless?--I'll do your business the night, for the sake
of them I love in my heart's core," nodding at Mr. and Miss Montenero;
"so, my lady, I'll bring ye word, faithful, how it's going with ye at
home--which is her house, and where, on God's earth?" added she, turning
to the footmen.

"If my satisfaction be the object, sir, or madam," said Lady de
Brantefield, addressing herself with much solemnity to Mr. and Miss
Montenero, "I must take leave to request that a fitter messenger be
sent; I should, in any circumstances, be incapable of trusting to the
representations of such a person."

The fury of the orange-woman kindled--her eyes flashed fire--her arms
a-kimbo, she advanced repeating, "Fitter!--Fitter!--What's that ye
say?--You're not Irish--not a bone in your skeleton!"

Lady Anne screamed. Mr. Montenero forced the orange-woman back, and
Berenice and I hurried Lady de Brantefield and her daughter across the
hall into the eating-room. Mr. Montenero followed an instant afterwards,
telling Lady de Brantefield that he had despatched one of his own
servants for intelligence. Her ladyship bowed her head without speaking.
He then explained why the orange-woman happened to be in his house, and
spoke of the zeal and ability with which she had this day served us.
Lady de Brantefield continued at intervals to bow her head while Mr.
Montenero spoke, and to look at her watch, while Lady Anne, simpering,
repeated, "Dear, how odd!" Then placing herself opposite to a large
mirror, Lady Anne re-adjusted her dress. That settled, she had nothing
to do but to recount her horrors over again. Her mother, lost in
reverie, sat motionless. Berenice, meantime, while the messenger was
away, made the most laudable and kind efforts, by her conversation,
to draw the attention of her guests from themselves and their
apprehensions; but apparently without effect, and certainly without
thanks.

At length, Berenice and her father being called out of the room, I was
left alone with Lady de Brantefield and Lady Anne: the mother broke
silence, and turning to the daughter, said, in a most solemn tone of
reproach, "Anne! Lady Anne Mowbray!--how could you bring me into this
house of all others--a Jew's--when you know the horror I have always
felt--"

"La, mamma! I declare I was so terrified, I didn't know one house from
another. But when I saw Mr. Harrington, I was so delighted I never
thought about it's being _the Jew's_ house--and what matter?"

"What matter!" repeated Lady de Brantefield: "are you my daughter, and a
descendant of Sir Josseline de Mowbray, and ask what matter?"

"Dear mamma, that's the old story! that's so long ago!--How can
you think of such old stuff at such a time as this? I'm sure I was
frightened out of my wits--I forgot even my detestation of----But I must
not say that before Mr. Harrington. But now I see the house, and
_all that,_ I don't wonder at him so much; I declare it's a monstrous
handsome house--as rich as a Jew! I'm sure I hope those wretches will
not destroy _our_ house--and, oh! the great mirror, mamma!"

Mr. and Miss Montenero returned with much concern in their countenances:
they announced that the messenger had brought word that the mob were
actually pulling down Lady de Brantefield's house--that the furniture
had all been dragged out into the street, and that it was now burning.
Pride once more gave way to undisguised terror in Lady de Brantefield's
countenance, and both ladies stood in speechless consternation. Before
we had time to hear or to say more, the orange-woman opened the door,
and putting in her head, called out in a voice of authority, "Jantlemen,
here's one wants yees, admits of no delay; lave all and come out,
whether you will or no, the minute."

We went out, and with an indescribable gesture, and wink of
satisfaction, the moment she had Mr. Montenero and me in the hall, she
said in a whisper, "'Tis only myself, dears, but 'tis I am glad I got
yees out away from being bothered by the presence of them women, whiles
ye'd be settling all for life or death, which we must now do--for don't
be nursing and dandling yourselves in the notion that _the boys_ will
not be wid ye. It's a folly to talk--they will; my head to a China
orange they will, now: but take it asy, jewels--we've got an hour's
law--they've one good hour's work first--six garrets to gut, where they
are, and tree back walls, with a piece of the front, still to pull down.
Oh! I larnt all. He is a _'cute_ lad you sent, but not being used to it,
just went and ruined and murdered us all by what he let out! What do ye
tink? But when one of the boys was questioning him who he belonged to,
and what brought him in it, he got frighted, and could think of noting
at all but the truth to tell: so they've got the scent, and they'll
follow the game. Ogh! had I been my own messenger, in lieu of minding
that woman within, I'd have put 'em off the scent. But it's past me
now--so what next?" While Mr. Montenero and I began to consult together,
she went on--"I'll tell you what you'll do: you'll send for two chairs,
or one--less suspicious, and just get the two in asy, the black
one back, the white for'ard, beca'ase she's coming nat'ral from the
Opera--if stopped, and so the chairmen, knowing no more than Adam who
they would be carrying, might go through the thick of the boys at a
pinch safe enough, or round any way, sure; they know the town, and the
short cuts, and set 'em down (a good riddance!) out of hand, at any
house at all they mention, who'd resave them of their own frinds, or
kith and kin--for, to be sure, I suppose they _have_ frinds, tho' I'm
not one. You'll settle with them by the time it's come, where they'll
set down, and I'll step for the chair, will I?"

"No," said Mr. Montenero, "not unless it be the ladies' own desire to
go: I cannot turn them out of my house, if they choose to stay; at all
hazards they shall have every protection I can afford. Berenice, I am
sure, will think and feel as I do."

Mr. Montenero returned to the drawing-room, to learn the determination
of his guests.

"There goes as good a Christian!" cried the Widow Levy, holding up her
forefinger, and shaking it at Mr. Montenero the moment his back was
turned: "didn't I tell ye so from the first? Oh! if he isn't a jewel
of a Jew!--and the daughter the same!" continued she, following me as
I walked up and down the hall: "the kind-hearted cratur, how tinder she
looked at the fainting Jezabel--while the black woman turning from
her in her quality scowls.--Oh! I seed it all, and with your own eyes,
dear--but I hope they'll go--and once we get a riddance of them women.
I'll answer for the rest. Bad luck to the minute they come into the
house! I wish the jantleman would be back--Oh! here he is--and will
they go, jewel?" cried she, eagerly. "The ladies will stay," said Mr.
Montenero.

"Murder!--but you can't help it--so no more about it--but what arms have
ye?"

No arms were to be found in the house but a couple of swords, a pair
of pistols of Mr. Montenero's, and one gun, which had been left by the
former proprietor. Mr. Montenero determined to write immediately to his
friend General B--, to request that a party of the military might be
sent to guard his house.

"Ay, so best, send for the dragoons, the only thing left on earth for us
now: but don't let 'em fire on _the boys_--disperse 'em with the horse,
asy, ye can, without a shot; so best--I'll step down and feel the pulse
of all below."

While Mr. Montenero wrote, Berenice, alarmed for her father, stood
leaning on the back of his chair, in silence.

"Oh! Mr. Harrington! Mr. Harrington!" repeated Lady Anne, "what will
become of us! If Colonel Topham was but here! Do send to the
Opera, pray, pray, with _my_ compliments--Lady Anne Mowbray's
compliments--he'll come directly, I'm sure."

"That my son, Lord Mowbray, should be out of town, how extraordinary and
how unfortunate!" cried Lady de Brantefield, "when we might have had his
protection, his regiment, without applying to strangers."

She walked up and down the room with the air of a princess in chains.
The orange-woman bolted into the room, and pushed past her ladyship,
while Mr. Montenero was sealing his note.

"Give it, jewel!--It's I'll be the bearer; for all your powdered men
below has taken fright by the dread the first messenger got, and dares
not be carrying a summons for the military through the midst of _them_:
but I'll take it for yees--and which way will I go to get quickest to
your general's? and how will I know his house?--for seven of them below
bothered my brains."

Mr. Montenero repeated the direction--she listened coolly, then stowing
the letter in her bosom, she stood still for a moment with a look
of deep deliberation--her head on one side, her forefinger on
her cheek-bone, her thumb under her chin, and the knuckle of the
middle-finger compressing her lips.

"See, now, _they'll_ be apt to come up the stable lane for the back o'
the house, and another party of them will be in the square, in front;
so how will it be with me to get into the house to yees again, without
opening the doors for _them_, in case they are wid _ye_ afore I'd get
the military up?--I have it," cried she.

She rushed to the door, but turned back again to look for her pipe,
which she had laid on the table.

"Where's my pipe?--Lend it me--What am I without my pipe?"

"The savage!" cried Lady de Brantefield.

"The fool!" said Lady Anne.

The Widow Levy nodded to each of the two ladies, as she lit the pipe
again, but without speaking to them, turned to us, and said, "If
the boys would meet me without my pipe, they'd not know me; or smell
something odd, and guess I was on some unlawful errand."

As she passed Berenice and me, who were standing together, she hastily
added, "Keep a good heart, sweetest!--At the last push, you have one
will shed the heart's drop for ye!"

A quick, scarcely perceptible motion of her eye towards me marked her
meaning; and one involuntary look from Berenice at that moment, even
in the midst of alarm, spread joy through my whole frame. In the common
danger we were drawn closer together--we _thought_ together;--I was
allowed to help her in the midst of the general bustle.

It was necessary, as quickly as possible, to determine what articles
in the house were of most value, and to place these in security. It was
immediately decided that the pictures were inestimable.--What was to be
done with them? Berenice, whose presence of mind never forsook her,
and whose quickness increased with the occasion, recollected that the
unfinished picture-gallery, which had been built behind the house,
adjoining to the back drawing-room, had no window opening to the street:
it was lighted by a sky-light; it had no communication with any of the
apartments in the house, except with the back drawing-room, into which
it was intended to open by large glass doors; but fortunately these
were not finished, and, at this time, there was no access to the
picture-gallery but by a concealed door behind the gobelin tapestry of
the back drawing-room--an entrance which could hardly be discovered by
any stranger. In the gallery were all the plasterers' trestles, and the
carpenters' lumber; however, there was room soon made for the pictures:
all hands were in motion, every creature busy and eager, except Lady de
Brantefield and her daughter, who never offered the smallest assistance,
though we were continually passing with our loads through the front
drawing-room, in which the two ladies now were. Lady Anne standing up
in the middle of the room looked like an actress ready dressed for some
character, but without one idea of her own. Her mind, naturally weak,
was totally incapacitated by fear: she kept incessantly repeating as we
passed and repassed, "Bless me! one would think the day of judgment was
coming!"

Lady de Brantefield all the time sat in the most remote part of the
room, fixed in a huge arm-chair. The pictures and the most valuable
things were, by desperately hard work, just stowed into our place of
safety, when we heard the shouts of the mob, at once at the back and
front of the house, and soon a thundering knocking at the hall-door.
Mr. Montenero and I went to the door, of course without opening it, and
demanded, in a loud voice, what they wanted.

"We require the papists," one answered for the rest, "the two women
papists and the priest you've got within, to be given up, for your
lives!"

"There is no priest here--there are no papists here:--two protestant
ladies, strangers to me, have taken refuge here, and I will not give
them up," said Mr. Montenero.

"Then we'll pull down the house."

"The military will be here directly," said Mr. Montenero, coolly; "you
had better go away."

"The military!--then make haste, boys, with the work."

And with a general cry of "No papists!--no priests!--no Jews!--no wooden
shoes!" they began with a volley of stones against the windows. I ran to
see where Berenice was. It had been previously agreed among us, that
she and her guests, and every female in the house, should, on the first
alarm, retire into a back room; but at the first shout of the mob, Lady
de Brantefield lost the little sense she ever possessed: she did not
faint, but she stiffened herself in the posture in which she sat, and
with her hands turned down over the elbows of the huge chair, on which
her arms were extended, she leaned back in all the frightful rigidity of
a corpse, with a ghastly face, and eyes fixed.

Berenice, in vain, tried to persuade her to move. Her ideas were
bewildered or concentrated. Only the obstinacy of pride remained alive
within her.

"No," she said, "she would never move from that spot--she would not be
commanded by Jew or Jewess."

"Don't you hear the mob--the stones at the windows?"

"Very well. They would all pay for it on the scaffold or the gibbet."

"But if they break in here you will be torn to pieces."

"No--those only will be sacrificed who _have sacrificed_. A 'de
Brantefield'--they dare not!--I shall not stir from this spot. Who will
presume to touch Lady de Brantefield?"

Mr. Montenero and I lifted up the huge chair on which she sat, and
carried her and it into the back room.

The door of this room was scarcely shut, and the tapestry covering but
just closed over the entrance into the picture-gallery, when there was a
cry from the hall, and the servants came rushing to tell us that one of
the window-shutters had given way.

Mr. Montenero, putting the pistols into my hand, took the gun, ran
down stairs, and stationed himself so as to defend the entrance to the
window, at which the people were pelting with stones; declaring that he
would fire on the first man who should attempt to enter.

A man leaped in, and, in the struggle, Mr. Montenero's gun was wrested
from him.

On my presenting a pistol, the man scrambled out of the window, carrying
away with him the prize he had seized.

At this moment the faithful Jacob appeared amongst us as if by miracle.
"Master, we are safe," said he, "if we can defend ourselves for a few
minutes. The orange-woman delivered your letter, and the military
are coming. She told me how to get in here, through the house that is
building next door, from the leads of which I crept through a trap-door
into your garret."

With the pistols, and with the assistance of the servants who were
armed, some of them with swords, and others with whatever weapons came
to hand, we made such a show of resistance as to keep the mob at bay for
some moments.

"Hark!" cried Jacob; "thank Heaven, there's the military!" There was a
sudden cessation of stones at the window. We heard the joyful sound
of the horses' hoofs in the street. A prodigious uproar ensued, then
gradually subsided. The mob was dispersed, and fled in different
directions, and the military followed. We heard them gallop off. We
listened till not a sound, either of human voice or of horse's foot, was
to be heard. There was perfect silence; and when we looked as far as our
eyes could reach out of the broken window, there was not a creature to
be seen in the square or in the line of street to which it opened.

We ran to let out our female prisoners; I thought only of Berenice--she,
who had shown so much self-possession during the danger, seemed most
overpowered at this moment of joy; she threw her arms round her father,
and held him fast, as if to convince herself that he was safe. Her next
look was for me, and in her eyes, voice, and manner, when she thanked
me, there was an expression which transported me with joy; but it was
checked, it was gone the next moment: some terrible recollection seemed
to cross her mind. She turned from me to speak to that odious Lady de
Brantefield. I could not see Mr. Montenero's countenance, for he, at the
same instant, left us, to single out, from the crowd assembled in the
hall, the poor Irishwoman, whose zeal and intrepid gratitude had been
the means of our deliverance. I was not time enough to hear what Mr.
Montenero said to her, or what reward he conferred; but that the reward
was judicious, and that the words were grateful to her feelings in the
highest degree, I had full proof; for when I reached the hall, the widow
was on her knees, with hands uplifted to Heaven, unable to speak, but
with tears streaming down her hard face: she wiped them hastily away,
and started up.

"It's not a little thing brings me to this," said she; "none ever drew a
tear from my eyes afore, since the boy I lost."

She drew the hood of her cloak over her head, and pushed her way through
the servants to get out of the hall-door; I unbolted and unchained it
for her, and as I was unlocking it, she squeezed up close to me, and
laying her iron hand on mine, said in a whisper, "God bless yees! and
don't forget my thanks to the sweet _Jewish_--I can't speak 'em now,
'tis you can best, and joined in my prayers ye shall ever be!" said our
guardian angel, as I opened the door; and as she passed out, she added,
"You are right, jewel--she's worth all the fine ladies in Lon'on,
feathers an' all in a bag."

I had long been entirely of the Widow Levy's opinion, though the mode
of expression would never have occurred to me. What afterwards became of
Lady Anne and of her mother this night, I do not distinctly recollect.
Lady de Brantefield, when the alarm was over, I believe, recovered her
usual portion of sense, and Lady Anne her silly spirits; but neither of
them, I know, showed any feeling, except for themselves. I have an
image of Lady de Brantefield standing up, and making, at parting, such
ungracious acknowledgments to her kind hostess and generous protector,
as her pride and her prejudices would permit. Both their ladyships
seemed to be in a hurry to get out of the house, and I know that
I rejoiced in their departure. I was in hopes of one moment, one
explanatory word or look from Berenice. She was retiring to her own
apartment, as I returned, with her father, after putting those two women
into their carriage.

"I am now quite convinced," said Mr. Montenero, smiling, "that Mr.
Harrington never could have been engaged or attached to Lady Anne
Mowbray."

"Is it possible you ever imagined?"

"I did not _imagine_, I only heard and believed--and now I have seen,
and I disbelieve."

"And is this the obstacle, the invincible obstacle?" cried I.

Berenice sighed, and walked on to her room.

"I wish it were!" said Mr. Montenero; "but I pray you, sir, do not
speak, do not think of this to-night--farewell! we all want repose."

I did not think that I wanted repose till the moment I lay down in bed,
and then, overpowered with bodily fatigue, I fell into a profound sleep,
from which I did not awaken till late the next morning, when my man,
drawing back my curtains, presented to me a note from--I could hardly
believe my eyes--"from Miss Montenero"--from Berenice! I started up,
and read these words written in pencil: "My father is in danger--come to
us."

How quick I was in obeying may be easily imagined. I went well armed,
but in the present danger arms were of no use. I found that Mr.
Montenero was summoned before one of the magistrates, on a charge of
having fired from his window the preceding night before the Riot Act had
been read--of having killed an inoffensive passenger. Now the fact was,
that no shot had ever been fired by Mr. Montenero; but such was the rage
of the people at the idea that the _Jew_ had killed a Christian, and
one of their party, that the voice of truth could not be heard. They
followed with execrations as he was carried before the magistrate; and
waited with impatience, assembled round the house, in hopes of seeing
him committed to prison to take his trial for murder. As I was not
ignorant of the substantial nature of the defence which the spirit and
the forms of English law provide in all cases for truth and innocence,
against false accusation and party prejudice, I was not alarmed at the
clamour I heard; I was concerned only for the temporary inconvenience
and mortification to Mr. Montenero, and for the alarm to Berenice. The
magistrate before whom Mr. Montenero appeared was an impartial and very
patient man: I shall not so far try the patience of others as to record
all that was positively said, but which could not be sworn to--all that
was offered in evidence, but which contradicted itself, or which
could not be substantiated by any good witness--at length one
creditable-looking man came forward against Mr. Montenero.

He said he was an ironmonger--that he had been passing by at the time
of the riot, and had been hurried along by the crowd against his will
to Mr. Montenero's house, where he saw a sailor break open the
window-shutter of one of the lower rooms--that he saw a shot fired by
Mr. Montenero--that the sailor, after a considerable struggle, wrested
the gun, with which the shot had been fired, from Mr. Montenero, and
retreated with it from the window--that hearing the cry of murder in
the crowd, he thought it proper to secure the weapon, that it might be
produced in evidence--and that the piece which he now produced was that
which had been taken from Mr. Montenero.

I perceived great concern in the countenance of the magistrate, who,
addressing himself to Mr. Montenero, asked him what he had to say in his
defence.

"Sir," said Mr. Montenero, "I acknowledge that to be the gun which was
wrested from my hands by the sailor; and I acknowledge that I attempted
with that gun to defend my family and my house from immediate violence;
I am, however," continued he, "happy to have escaped having injured any
person, even in the most justifiable cause, for the piece did not go
off, it only flashed in the pan."

"If that be the case," said the magistrate, "the piece is still loaded."

The gun was tried, and it was found to be empty both of powder and ball.
As the magistrate returned the piece to the man, I came forward and
asked leave to examine it. I observed to the magistrate, that if the
piece had been fired, the inside of the barrel must retain marks of
the discharge, whereas, on the contrary, the inside of the barrel was
perfectly smooth and clean. To this the man replied, that he had cleaned
the piece when he brought it home, which might indeed have been true. At
this moment, I recollected a circumstance that I had lately heard from
the officers in the country, who had been talking about a fowling-piece,
and of the careless manner in which fire-arms are sometimes proved
[Footnote: See Manton on Gunnery.]. Upon examination, I found that what
I suspected might be just possible was actually the case with respect
to the piece in question--the touch-hole had never been bored through,
though the piece was marked as _proof_! I never shall forget the
satisfaction which appeared in the countenance of the humane magistrate,
who from the beginning had suspected the evidence, whom he knew from
former delinquency. The man was indeed called an ironmonger, but his
was one of those _old iron shops_ which were known to be receptacles of
stolen goods of various descriptions. To my surprise, it now appeared
that this man's name was Dutton: he was the very Dutton who had formerly
been Jacob's rival, and who had been under Lord Mowbray's protection.
Time and intemperance had altered him so much, that I had not, till I
heard his name, the slightest recollection of his face. What his motive
for appearing against Mr. Montenero might be, whether it was hatred to
him as being the patron of Jacob, whom Dutton envied and detested, or
whether Dutton was instigated by some other and higher person, I shall
not now stop to inquire. As he had not been put upon his oath, he had
not been guilty of perjury; he was discharged amidst the hootings of the
mob. Notwithstanding their prejudice against the Jews, and their rage
against a Jew who had harboured, as they conceived, two _concealed_
papists and a priest, yet the moment an attempt to bear false witness
against Mr. Montenero appeared, the people took his part. In England the
mob is always in favour of truth and innocence, wherever these are
made clearly evident to their senses. Pleased with themselves for their
impartiality, it was not difficult at this moment for me to convince
them, as I did, that Mr. Montenero had not harboured either papists or
priest. The mob gave us three cheers. As we passed through the crowd,
I saw Jacob and the orange-woman--the orange-woman, with broad expanded
face of joy, stretched up her arms, and shouted loud, that all the mob
might hear. Jacob, little accustomed to sympathy, and in the habit of
repressing his emotions, stood as one unmoved or dumb, till his eyes met
mine, and then suddenly joy spread over his features and flashed from
his dark eyes--that was a face of delight I never can forget; but I
could not stay: I hastened to be the first to tell Berenice of her
father's safety, and of the proof which all the world had had of the
falsehood of the charge against him. I ran up to the drawing-room, where
she was alone. She fainted in my arms.

And now you think, that when she came to herself, there was an end of
all my fears, all my suspense--you think that her love, her gratitude,
overcame the objection, whatever it may be, which has hitherto been
called invincible--alas! you are mistaken.

I was obliged to resign Berenice to the care of her attendants. A short
time afterwards I received from her father the following note:--

"My obligations to you are great, so is my affection for you; but the
happiness of my child, as well as your happiness, is at stake.

"I dare not trust my gratitude--my daughter and you must never meet
again, or must meet to part no more.

"I cannot yet decide: if I shall be satisfied that the obstacle do not
exist, she shall be yours; if it do exist, we sail the first of next
month for America, and you, Mr. Harrington, will not be the only, or
perhaps the most, unhappy person of the three.

"A. MONTENERO."



CHAPTER 16

The Sunday after the riots, I happened to see Mrs. Coates, as we were
coming out of St. George's church. She was not in full-blown, happy
importance, as formerly: she looked ill and melancholy; or, as one of
her city neighbours, who was following her out of church, expressed it,
quite "crest-fallen." I heard some whispering that "things were going
wrong at home with the Coates's--that the world was going down hill with
the alderman."

But a lady, who was quite a stranger, though she did me the honour to
speak to me, explained that it was "no such thing--worth a plum still,
if he be worth a farthing. 'Tis only that she was greatly put out of her
way last week, and frightened, till well nigh beside herself, by them
rioters that came and set fire to one of the Coates's, Mr. Peter's,
warehouse. Now, though poor Mrs. Coates, you'd think, is so plump and
stout to look at, she is as nervous!--you've no notion, sir!--shakes
like an aspen leaf, if she but takes a cup of green tea--so I prescribe
bohea. But there she's curtsying, and nodding, and kissing hands to you,
sir, see!--and can tell you, no doubt, all about herself."

Mrs. Coates's deplorably placid countenance, tremulous muscles, and
lamentable voice and manner, confirmed to me the truth of the assertion
that she had been frightened nearly out of her senses.

"Why now, sir, after all," said she, "I begin to find what fools we
were, when we made such a piece of work one election year, and said that
no soldiers should come into the town, 'cause we were _free Britons_.
Why, Lord 'a mercy! 'tis a great deal better _maxim_ to sleep safe in
our beds than to be _free Britons_ and burnt to death [Footnote: Vide
Mrs. Piozzi's Letters.]."

Persons of higher pretensions to understanding and courage than poor
Mrs. Coates, seemed at this time ready to adopt her maxim; and patriots
feared that it might become the national sentiment. No sooner were order
and tranquillity perfectly re-established in the city, than the public
in general, and party politicians in particular, were intent upon the
trials of the rioters, and more upon the question whether the military
had suppressed the riots constitutionally or unconstitutionally. It
was a question to be warmly debated in parliament; and this, after the
manner in which great public and little private interests, in the chain
of human events, are continually linked together, proved of important
consequence to me and my love affairs.

A call of the house brought my father to town, contrary to his will,
and consequently in ill-humour. This ill-humour was increased by the
perplexing situation in which he found himself, with his passions on
one side of the question and his principles on the other: hating the
papists, and loving the ministry. In his secret soul, my father cried
with the rioters, "No papists!--no French!--no Jews!--no wooden shoes!"
but a cry against government was abhorrent to his very nature. My
conduct, with regard to the riot at Mr. Montenero's, and towards the
rioters, by whom he had been falsely accused, my father heard spoken of
with approbation in the political circles which he most reverenced; and
he could not but be pleased, he confessed, to hear that his son had so
properly conducted himself: but still it was all in defence of the Jews,
and of the father of that Jewess whose very name was intolerable to his
ear.

"So, Harrington, my boy, you've gained great credit, I find, by your
conduct last Wednesday night. Very lucky, too, for your mother's friend,
Lady de Brantefield, that you were where you were. But after all,
sir, what the devil business had you there?--and again on Thursday
morning!--I acknowledge that was a good hit you made, about the gun--but
I wish it had been in the defence of some good Christian: what business
has a Jew with a gun at all?--Government knows best, to be sure; but
I split against them once before, three-and-twenty years ago, on the
naturalization bill. What is this cry which the people set up?--'_No
Jews!--no wooden shoes_!'--ha! ha! ha!--the dogs!--but they carried it
too far, the rascals!--When it comes to throwing stones at gentlemen's
carriages, and pulling down gentlemen's and noblemen's dwelling-houses,
it's a mob and a riot, and the rioters deserve certainly to be
hanged--and I'm heartily glad my son has come forward, Mrs. Harrington,
and has taken a decided and distinguished part in bringing the offenders
to justice. But, Harrington, pray tell me now, young gentleman, about
that Jewess."

Before I opened my lips, something in the turn of my physiognomy enraged
my father to such a degree that all the blood in his body came into
his face, and, starting up, he cried, "Don't answer me, sir--I ask
no questions--I don't want to hear any thing about the matter! Only
_if_--if, sir--if--that's all I have to say--if--by Jupiter Ammon--sir,
I won't hear a word--a syllable! You only wish to explain--I won't have
any explanation--I have business enough on my hands, without listening
to a madman's nonsense!"

My father began to open his morning's packet of letters and newspapers.
One letter, which had been directed to his house in the country, and
which had followed him to town, seemed to, alarm him terribly. He
put the letter into my mother's hand, cursed all the post-masters in
England, who were none of them to blame for its not reaching him sooner,
called for his hat and cane, said he must go instantly to the city,
but "feared all was, too late, and that we were undone." With this
comfortable assurance he left us. The letter was from a broker in
Lombard-street, who did business for my father, and who wrote to let him
know that, "in consequence of the destruction of a great brewery in the
late riots, several mercantile houses had been injured. Alderman Coates
had died suddenly of an apoplexy, it was said: his house had closed on
Saturday; and it was feared that Baldwin's bank would not stand the run
made on it."

Now in Baldwin's bank, as my mother informed me, my father had eight
days before lodged 30,000, the purchase money of that estate which he
had been obliged to sell to pay for his three elections. This sum
was, in fact, every shilling of it due to creditors, who had become
clamorous; and "if _this_ be gone," said my mother, "we are lost
indeed!--this house must go, and the carriages, and every thing; the
Essex estate is all we shall have left, and live there as we can--very
ill it must be, to us who have been used to affluence and luxury. Your
father, who expects his table, and every individual article of his
establishment, to be in the first style, as if by magic, without ever
reflecting on the means, but just inviting people, and leaving it to me
to entertain them properly--oh! I know how bitterly he would feel even
retrenchment!--and this would be ruin; and every thing that vexes him
of late brings on directly a fit of the gout--and then you know what his
temper is! Heaven knows what I had to go through with my nerves, and my
delicate health, during the last fit, which came on the very day after
we left you, and lasted six weeks, and which he sets down to your
account, Harrington, and to the account of your Jewess."

I had too much feeling for my mother's present distress to increase her
agitation by saying any thing on this tender subject. I let her accuse
me as she pleased--and she very soon began to defend me. The accounts
she had heard in various letters of the notice that had been taken of
Miss Montenero by some of the leading persons in the fashionable world,
the proposals that had been made to her, and especially the addresses of
Lord Mowbray, which had been of sufficient publicity, had made, I found,
a considerable alteration in my mother's judgment or feelings. She
observed that it was a pity my father was so violently prejudiced
and obstinate, for that, after all, it would not be an unprecedented
marriage. My mother, after a pause, went on to say, that though she was
not, she hoped, an interested person, and should scorn the idea of her
son's being a fortune-hunter--and indeed I had given pretty sufficient
proof that I was not of that description of suitors; yet, if the Jewess
were really amiable, and as capable of generous attachment, it would be,
my mother at last acknowledged, the best thing I could do, to secure an
independent establishment with the wife of my choice.

I was just going to tell my mother of the conversation that I had had
with Mr. Montenero, and of _the obstacle_, when her mind reverted to
the Lombard-street letter, and to Baldwin's bank; and for a full hour
we discussed the probability of Baldwin's standing or failing, though
neither of us had any means of judging--of this, being perhaps the
least anxious of the two, I became sensible the first. I finished, by
stationing myself at the window to watch for my father's return, of
which I promised to give my mother notice, if she would lie down quietly
on the sofa, and try to compose her spirits; she had given orders to be
denied to all visitors, but every knock at the door made her start, and
"There's your father! There's Mr. Harrington!" was fifty times repeated
before the hour when it was even possible that my father could have
returned from the city.

When the probable time came and passed, when it grew later and later
without my father's appearing, our anxiety and impatience rose to the
highest pitch.

At last I gave my mother notice that I saw among the walkers at the end
of the street which joined our square, an elderly gentleman with a cane.

"But there are so many elderly gentlemen with canes," said my mother,
joining me at the window. "Is it Mr. Harrington?"

"It is very like my father, ma'am. Now you can see him plainly picking
his way over the crossing."

"He is looking down," said my mother; "that is a very bad sign.--But is
he not looking up now?"

"No, ma'am; and now he is taking snuff."

"Taking snuff! is he? Then there is some hope," said my mother.

During the last forty yards of my father's walk, we each drew
innumerable and often opposite conclusions, from his slightest gestures
and motions, interpreting them all as favourable or unfavourable omens.
In the course of five minutes my mother's _presentiments_ varied fifty
times. At length came his knock at the door. My mother grew pale--to her
ear it said "all's lost;" to mine it sounded like "all's safe."

"He stays to take off his great coat! a good sign; but he comes heavily
up stairs." Our eyes were fixed on the door--he opened it, and advanced
towards us without uttering one syllable.

"All's lost--and all's safe," said my father. "My fortune's safe, Mrs.
Harrington."

"What becomes of your presentiments, my dear mother?" said I.

"Thank Heaven!" said my mother, "I was wrong for once."

"You might thank Heaven for more than once, madam," said my father.

"But then what did you mean by all's lost, Mr. Harrington; if all's
safe, how can all be lost?"

"My all, Mrs. Harrington, is not all fortune. There is such a thing as
credit as well as fortune, Mrs. Harrington."

"But if you have not lost your fortune, you have not lost your credit, I
presume," said my mother.

"I have a character as a gentleman, Mrs. Harrington."

"Of course."

"A character for consistency, Mrs. Harrington, to preserve."

"'Tis a hard thing to preserve, no doubt," said my mother.

"But I wish you'd speak plain, for my nerves can't bear it."

"Then I can tell you, Mrs. Harrington, your nerves have a great deal to
bear yet. What will your nerves feel, madam--what will your enthusiasm
say, sir--when I tell you, that I have lost my heart to--a Jewess?"

"Berenice!" cried I.

"Impossible!" cried my mother. "How came you to see her?"

"That's not for you to know yet; but first, young gentleman, you who are
hanging on tenter-hooks, you must hang there a little longer."

"As long as you please, my dear father," said I.

"_Your dear father_!--ay, I'm very dear to you now, because you are in
hopes, sir, I shall turn fool, and break my vow into the bargain; but I
am not come to _that_ yet, my good sir--I have some consistency."

"Oh! never mind your consistency, for mercy's sake, Mr. Harrington,"
said my mother, "only tell us your story, for I really am dying to hear
it, and I am so weak."

"Ring the bell for dinner," said my father, "for Mrs. Harrington's so
weak, I'll keep my story till after dinner." My mother protested she was
quite strong, and we both held my father fast, insisting--he being in
such excellent humour and spirits that we might insist--insisting upon
his telling his story before he should have any dinner.

"Where was I?" said he.

"You know best," said my mother; "you said you had lost your heart to a
Jewess, and Harrington exclaimed _Berenice!_ and that's all I've heard
yet."

"Very well, then, let us leave Berenice for the present"--I
groaned--"and go to her father, Mr. Montenero, and to a certain Mrs.
Coates."

"Mrs. Coates! did you see her too?" cried my mother: "you seem to have
seen every body in the world this morning, Mr. Harrington. How happened
it that you saw vulgar Mrs. Coates?"

"Unless I shut my eyes, how can I avoid seeing vulgar people, madam?
and how can I tell my story, Mrs. Harrington, if you interrupt me
perpetually, to ask how I came to see every soul and body I mention?"

"I will interrupt you no more," said my mother, submissively, for she
was curious.

I placed an arm-chair for my father--in my whole life I never felt so
dutiful or so impatient.

"There, now," said my father, taking his seat in the chair, "if you
will promise not to interrupt me any more, I will tell you my story
regularly. I went to Baldwin's bank: I found a great crowd, all pressing
their demands--the clerks as busy as they could be, and all putting a
good face upon the matter. The head-clerk I saw was vexed at the sight
of me--he came out from behind his desk, and begged I would go up stairs
to Mr. Baldwin, who wished to speak to me. I was shown up stairs to Mr.
Baldwin, with whom I found a remarkably gentlemanlike foreign-looking
man.

"Yes, sir--yes, ma'am--Mr. Montenero: it is well you did not either of
you interrupt me to tell me his name, for if you had, I would not have
told you a word more. Well, Mr. Baldwin, evidently wishing me at the
devil, came forward to receive me, and, in great perplexity, said he
would be at my command; he would settle my business immediately;
but must beg my pardon for five minutes, while he settled with this
gentleman, _Mr. Montenero_. On hearing the name, I am sure my look would
have said plain enough to any man alive but Baldwin, that I did not
choose to be introduced; but Baldwin has no breeding: so it was _Mr.
Montenero, Mr. Harrington--Mr. Harrington, Mr. Montenero_. I bowed, and
wished the _Jew_ in the Red Sea, and Baldwin along with him. I then took
up a newspaper and retreated to the window, begging that I might not be
any interruption. The cursed paper was four days old, so I put it down;
and as I stood looking at nothing out of the window, I heard Baldwin
going on with your Jew. They had a load of papers on the table, which
Baldwin kept shuffling, as he talked about the losses the house had
sustained by the sudden death of Alderman Coates, and the sad bankruptcy
of the executors. Baldwin seasoned high with compliments to the Jew upon
his known liberality and generosity, and was trying to get him to enter
into some security, which the Jew refused, saying that what he gave he
gave willingly, but he would not enter into security: he added, that
the alderman and his family had been unjustifiably extravagant; but
on condition that all was given up fairly to the creditors, and a new
course entered upon, he and his daughter would take care that the widow
should be provided for properly. As principal creditor, Mr. Baldwin
would, by this means, be first satisfied. I could not help thinking that
all the Jew said was fair enough, and firm too; but when he had said
and done, I wondered that he did not go away. He and Baldwin came to the
window to which I had retreated, and Baldwin, like a city bear as he is,
got in his awkward way between us, and seizing one button of my coat
and one of Mr. Montenero's, held us there face to face, while he went on
talking of my demand on the house.

"'You see, Mr. Harrington,' said he, 'how we are circumstanced. The
property of the firm is able to answer all fair demands in due course.
But here's a set and a run made against us, and no house could stand
without the assistance, that is, the forbearance of friends--that's what
we must look to. Some of our friends, in particular Mr. Montenero,
have been very friendly indeed--very handsome and liberal--and we have
nothing to say; we cannot, in reason, expect him to do more for the
Coates's or for us.' And then came accounts of the executors, &c., in
his banking jargon.

"What the deuce was all this to me, you know? and how awkward I felt,
held by the button there, to rejudge Mr. Montenero's acts! I had nothing
for it but my snuff-box. But Baldwin's a mere clerk--cannot guess at
the feelings of a gentleman. Mr. Montenero, I observed, looked down upon
Baldwin all the time with so much the air of a high-bred gentleman, that
I began to think he could not be the Jew--Montenero.

"Baldwin, still thinking only of holding him up as an example to me,
went on, saying, 'Mr. Montenero, who is a foreigner, and a stranger to
the house, has done so and so, and we trust our old friends will do as
much--Mr. Harrington in particular. There's our books on the table, open
to Mr. Harrington--he will see we shall be provided on the fifteenth
instant; but, in short, if Mr. Harrington draws his 30,000 to-day, he
drives us to pay in sixpences--so there's the case.' In short, it came
to this: if I drew, I certainly ruined them; if I did not draw, I ran a
great hazard of being ruined myself. No, Baldwin would not have it that
way--so when he had stated it after his own fashion, and put it into and
out of his banker's jargon, it came out to be, that if I drew directly
I was certain to lose the whole; and if I did not draw, I should have
a good chance of losing a great part. I pulled my button away from the
fellow, and without listening to any more of his jabbering, for I saw
he was only speaking _against time_, and all on his own side of the
question, I turned to look at the books, of which I knew I never should
make head or tail, being no auditor of accounts, but a plain country
gentleman. While I was turning over their confounded day-books and
ledgers in despair, your Jew, Harrington, came up to me, and with such
a manner as I did not conceive a Jew could have--but he is a Spanish
Jew--that makes all the difference, I suppose--'Mr. Harrington,' said
he, 'though I am a stranger to you, permit me to offer my services
in this business--I have some right to do so, as I have accepted of
services, and am under real obligations to Mr. Harrington, your son,
a young gentleman for whom I feel the highest attachment as well as
gratitude, but of whom I will now say only, that he has been one of
the chief means of saving my life and my character. His father cannot,
therefore, I think, refuse to let me show at least some sense of
the obligations I have willingly received. My collection of Spanish
pictures, which, without your son's exertions, I could not have saved
on the night of the riot, has been estimated by your best English
connoisseurs at 60,000. Three English noblemen are at this moment ready
to pay down 30,000 for a few of these pictures: this will secure Mr.
Harrington's demand on this house. If you, Mr. Baldwin, pay him, before
three hours are over the money shall be with you. It is no sacrifice of
my taste or of my pictures,' continued your noble Jew, in answer to my
scruples: 'I lodge them with three different bankers only for security
for the money. If Mr. Baldwin stands the storm, we are all as we
were--my pictures into the bargain. If the worst happen, I lose only a
few instead of all my collection.'

"This was very generous--quite noble, but you know I am an obstinate old
fellow. I had still the Jewess, the daughter, running in my head, and
I thought, perhaps, I was to be asked for my _consent_, you know,
Harrington, or some sly underplot of that kind.

"Mr. Montenero has a quick eye--I perceived that he saw into my
thoughts; but we could not speak to our purpose before Baldwin, and
Baldwin would never think of stirring, if one was dying to get him out
of the room. Luckily, however, he was called away by one of the clerks.

"Then Mr. Montenero, who speaks more to the point than any man I
ever heard, spoke directly of your love for his daughter, and said he
understood that it would not be a match that I should approve. I pleaded
my principles and religious difficulties:--he replied, 'We need not
enter into that, for the present business I must consider as totally
independent of any view to future connexion:'--if his daughter was going
to be married to-morrow to another man, he should do exactly the same
as he now proposed to do. He did not lessen her fortune:--he should
say nothing of what her sense of gratitude was and ought to be--she had
nothing to do with the business.

"When I found that my _Jupiter Amman_ was in no danger, and that the
love affair was to be kept clear out of the question, I was delighted
with your generous Jew, Harrington, and I frankly accepted his offer.
Baldwin came in again, was quite happy when he heard how it was settled,
gave me three drafts at thirty-one days for my money on the bankers Mr.
Montenero named: here I have them safe in my pocket. Mr. Montenero then
said, he would go immediately and perform his part of the business; and,
as he left the room, he begged Mr. Baldwin to tell his daughter that he
would call for her in an hour.

"I now, for the first time, understood that the daughter was in the
house; and I certainly felt a curiosity to see her. Baldwin told me she
was settling some business, signing some papers in favour of poor Mrs.
Coates, the alderman's widow. He added, that the Jewess was a charming
creature, and as generous as her father:--he told all she had done for
this widow and her children, on account of some kindness her mother had
received in early life from the Coates's family; and then there was a
history of some other family of Manessas--I never heard Baldwin eloquent
but this day, in speaking of your Jewess:--Harrington, I believe he is
in love with her himself. I said I should like to see her, if it could
be managed.

"Nothing easier, if I would partake of a cold collation just serving in
the next room for the friends of the house.

"You know the nearer a man is to being ruined, the better he must
entertain his friends. I walked into the next room, when collation time
came, and I saw Miss Montenero. Though I had given him a broad hint--but
the fellow understands nothing but his IOU's--he fell to introducing of
course: she is a most interesting-looking creature, I acknowledge, my
boy, if--she were not a Jewess. I thought she would have sunk into the
earth when she heard my name. I could not eat one morsel of the man's
collation--so--Ring for dinner, and let us say no more about the matter
at present: there is my oath against it, you know--there is an end of
the matter--don't let me hear a word from you, Harrington--I am tired to
death, quite exhausted, body and mind."

I refrained most dutifully, and most prudently, from saying one word
more on the subject, till my father, after dinner, and after being
refreshed by a sound and long-protracted sleep, began again to speak of
Mr. and Miss Montenero. This was the first time he omitted to call them
the Jew and Jewess. He condescended to say repeatedly, and with many
oaths, that they both deserved to be Christians--that if there was any
chance of the girl's conversion, even _he_ would overlook the father's
being a Jew, as he was such a noble fellow. Love could do wonders--as
my father knew when he was a young man--perhaps I might bring about her
conversion, and then all would be smooth and right, and no oath against
it.

I thanked my father for the kind concessions he now appeared willing
to make for my happiness, and from step to step, at each step repeating
that he did not want to hear a syllable about the matter, he made me
tell him every thing that had passed. Mowbray's rivalship and treachery
excited his indignation in the highest degree: he was heartily glad that
fellow was refused--he liked the girl for refusing him--some spirit--he
liked spirit--and he should be glad that his son carried away the prize.

He interrupted himself to tell me some of the feats of gallantry of his
younger days, and of the manner in which he had at last carried off my
mother from a rascal of a rival--a Lord Mowbray of those times.

When my father had got to this point, my mother ventured to ask whether
I had ever gone so far as to propose, actually to _propose_, for Miss
Montenero.

"Yes."

Both father and mother turned about, and asked, "What answer?"

I repeated, as nearly as I could, Mr. Montenero's words--and I produced
his note.

Both excited surprise and curiosity.

"What can this obstacle--this mysterious obstacle be?" said my mother.

"An obstacle on their side!" exclaimed my father: "is that possible?"

I had now, at least, the pleasure of enjoying their sympathy: and of
hearing them go over all the conjectures by which I had been bewildered.
I observed that the less chance there appeared to be of the match, the
more my father and mother inclined towards it.

"At least," said my mother, "I hope we shall know what the objection
is."

"It is very extraordinary, after all, that it should be on their side,"
repeated my father.

My mother's imagination, and my father's pride, were both strongly
excited; and I let them work without interruption.



CHAPTER 17

The time appointed for Mr. Montenero's final decision approached. In
a few days my fate was to be decided. The vessel that was to sail for
America was continually before my eyes.

It was more difficult to me to endure the suspense of these few days
than all the rest. My mother's sympathy, and the strong interest which
had been excited on the subject in my father's mind, were at first
highly agreeable; but there was so much more of curiosity and of pride
in their feelings than in mine, that at last it became irksome to me
to hear their conjectures and reflections. I did not like to answer
any questions--I could not bear to speak of Berenice, or even of Mr.
Montenero.

I took refuge in silence--my mother reproached me for my silence. I
talked on fast of any thing but that which interested me most.

My mother became extremely alarmed for my health, and I believe with
more reason than usual; for I could scarcely either eat, drink, or
sleep, and was certainly very feverish; but still I walked about, and
to escape from the constraint to which I put myself in her company,
to avoid giving her pain--to relieve myself from her hourly fond
inquiries--from the effort of talking, when I wished to be silent--of
appearing well, and in spirits, when I was ill, and when my heart was
dying within me, I escaped from her presence as much as possible. To
feed upon my thoughts in solitude, I either shut myself up in my room,
or walked all day in those streets where I was not likely to meet with
any one who knew me, or whom I knew; and there I was at least safe from
all notice, and secure from all sympathy: I am sure I experienced at
this time the truth of what some one has quaintly but justly asserted,
that an individual can never feel more completely alone than in the
midst of a crowded metropolis.

One evening when I was returning homewards through the city, fatigued,
but still prolonging my walk, that I might not be at home too early for
dinner, I was met and stopped by Jacob: I had not thought of him lately,
and when I looked up in his face, I was surprised by an appearance of
great perturbation. He begged pardon for stopping me, but he had been to
my house--he had been all over the town searching for me, to consult me
about a sad affair, in which he was unfortunately concerned. We were not
far from Manessa's, the jeweller's shop; I went in there with Jacob,
as he wished, he said, that I should hear Mr. Manessa's evidence on the
business, as well as his own. The affair was this: Lady de Brantefield
had, some time ago, brought to Mr. Manessa's some very fine antique
jewels, to be re-set for her daughter, Lady Anne Mowbray. One day,
immediately after the riots, both the ladies called at Mr. Manessa's,
to inquire if the jewels were ready. They were finished; the new setting
was approved: but Lady de Brantefield having suffered great losses by
the destruction of her house and furniture in the riots, and her
son, Lord Mowbray, being also in great pecuniary difficulties, it was
suggested by Lady Anne Mowbray, that her mother would be glad if Mr.
Manessa could dispose of some of the jewels, without letting it be known
to whom they had belonged. Mr. Manessa, willing to oblige, promised
secresy, and offered immediately to purchase the jewels himself; in
consequence, the jewels were all spread out upon a little table in the
back parlour--no one present but Jacob, Mr. Manessa, and the two ladies.
A great deal of conversation passed, and the ladies were a long time
settling what trinkets they would part with.

It was very difficult to accommodate at once the personal vanity of
the daughter, the family pride of the mother, and their pecuniary
difficulties. There occurred, in particular, a question about a topaz
ring, of considerable value, but of antique setting, which Lady Anne
Mowbray wished her mother to part with, instead of some more fashionable
diamond ornament that Lady Anne wanted to keep for herself. Lady de
Brantefield had, however, resisted all her daughter's importunities--had
talked a vast deal about the ring--told that it had been Sir Josseline
de Mowbray's--that it had come into his possession by ducal and princely
descent--that it was one of four rings, which had been originally a
present from Pope Innocent to King John, of which rings there was a full
description in some old chronicle [Footnote: Rymer's Foedera.], and
in Mr. Hume's History of England, to which her ladyship referred Mr.
Manessa: his curiosity [Footnote: For the satisfaction of any readers
who may have more curiosity upon the subject than Mr. Manessa had,
but yet who would not willingly rise from their seats to gratify their
curiosity, the passage is here given _gratis_. "Innocent wrote John a
mollifying letter, and sent him four golden rings, set with precious
stones; and endeavoured to enhance the value of the present, by
informing him of the many mysteries which were implied by it. He begged
him to consider, seriously, the _form_ of the rings, their _number_,
their _matter_, and their _colour_. Their form, he said, being round,
shadowed out eternity, which has neither beginning nor end. Their
number, four, being a square, denoted steadiness of mind, not to be
subverted either by adversity or prosperity, fixed for ever on the four
cardinal virtues. Gold, which is the matter, signified wisdom. The blue
of the sapphire, faith. The verdure of the emerald, hope. The redness
of the ruby, charity. And splendour of the topaz, good works." "By these
conceits," continued the historian, "Innocent endeavoured to repay John
for one of the most important prerogatives of the crown."], however,
was perfectly satisfied upon the subject, and he was, with all due
deference, willing to take the whole upon her ladyship's word, without
presuming to verify her authorities. While she spoke, she took the ring
from her finger, and put it into Jacob's hand, desiring to know if he
could make it fit her finger better, as it was rather too large. Jacob
told her it could be easily lessened, if her ladyship would leave it
for an hour or two with him. But her ladyship said she could not let Sir
Josseline's ring out of her own sight, it was of such inestimable value.
The troublesome affair of satisfying both the vain daughter and
the proud mother being accomplished--the last bows were made at the
door--the carriage drove away, and Manessa and Jacob thanked Heaven that
they had done with these _difficult_ customers. Two hours had scarcely
elapsed before a footman came from Lady de Brantefield with the
following note:--

"Lady de Brantefield informs Mr. Manessa that she is in the greatest
anxiety--not finding Sir Josseline de Mowbray's ring on her finger, upon
her return home. Her ladyship now recollects having left it in the hands
of one of Mr. Manessa's shopmen, a young man she believes of the name
of Jacob, the only person except Mr. Manessa, who was in the little
parlour, while her ladyship and Lady Anne Mowbray were there.

"Lady de Brantefield requests that Mr. Manessa will bring the ring
_himself_ to Lady Warbeck's, Hanover-square, where Lady de Brantefield
is at present.

"Lady de Brantefield desires Mr. M. will make _no delay_, as her
ladyship must remain in indescribable anxiety till Sir Josseline's ring
shall be restored. Her ladyship could not answer for such a loss to her
family and posterity.

"_Hanover-square, Tuesday._"



Jacob was perfectly certain that her ladyship had not left the ring
with him; nevertheless he made diligent search for it, and afterwards
accompanied Mr. Manessa to Lady Warbeck's, to assure Lady de Brantefield
that the ring was not in their house. He endeavoured to bring to her
recollection her having put it on her finger just before she got into
the carriage; but this her ladyship would not admit. Lady Anne supported
her mother's assertions; and Lady de Brantefield ended by being
haughtily angry, declaring she would not be contradicted by a shopman,
and that she was positive the ring had never been returned to her.
Within eight-and-forty hours the story was told by Lady de Brantefield
and her friends at every card-table at the polite end of the town, and
it was spread by Lady Anne through the park and the ball-rooms; and the
ladies'-maids had repeated it, with all manner of exaggerations, through
their inferior but not less extensive circles. The consequence was, that
the character of Mr. Manessa's house was hurt, and Jacob, who was the
person accused as the cause of it, was very unhappy. The confidence
Mr. Manessa had in him, and the kindness he showed him, increased
his regret. Lady de Brantefield had, in a high tone, threatened a
prosecution for the value of her _inestimable_ ring. This was what both
Jacob and Mr. Manessa would have desired--a public trial, they
knew, would bring the truth to light; but her ladyship was probably
discouraged by her legal advisers from a prosecution, so that Mr.
Manessa and Jacob were still left to suffer by the injustice of private
whisperings. Jacob offered to replace, as far as he could, the value of
this ring; but in Lady de Brantefield's opinion nothing could compensate
for its loss. Poor Jacob was in despair. Before I heard this story, I
thought that nothing could have forced my attention from my own affairs;
but I could not be so selfish as to desert or neglect Jacob in his
distress. I went with my mother this evening to see Lady de Brantefield;
her ladyship was still at her relation's, Lady Warbeck's house, where
she had apartments to herself, in which she could receive what company
she pleased. There was to be a ball in the house this evening, but
Lady de Brantefield never mixed in what she called _idle gaieties_; she
abhorred a bustle, as it infringed upon her personal dignity, and did
not agree with her internal persuasion that she was, or ought to be, the
first object in all company. We found her ladyship in her own retired
apartment; her eyes were weak, and the room had so little light in it,
that when we first went in, I could scarcely distinguish any object: I
saw, however, a young woman, who had been reading to her ladyship,
rise as we entered, put down her book, and prepare to retire. My mother
stopped her as she was passing, and turning to me, said, that this was a
young person, she was sure, I should be glad to see, the daughter of an
old friend of mine.

I looked, and saw a face which awakened the most painful associations of
my childhood.

"Did not I perceive any likeness?" my mother continued. "But it was
so many years since I had seen poor Fowler, and I was so very young a
child, no wonder I should not in the least recollect."

I had some recollection--if I was not mistaken--I stammered--I
stopped. In fact, I recollected too well to be able to pay the expected
compliment. However, after I had got over the first involuntary shudder,
I tried to say something to relieve the embarrassment which I fancied
the girl must feel.

She, in a mincing, waiting-gentlewoman's manner, and with a certain
unnatural softness of voice, which again brought all the mother to my
mind, assured me that if I'd forgot her mother, she had not forgot me;
for that she'd often and often heard her mother talk of me, and she was
morally confident her mother had never loved any child so doatingly,
except, to be sure, her own present lady's, Lady Anne Mowbray. Her
mother had often and often regretted she could never get a sight or
sentence of me since I grew up to be a great gentleman, she
always having been stationary down at my lady's, in Surrey, at
the Priory--housekeeper--and I never there; but if I'd have the
condescension to wish to gratify her mother, as it would be the greatest
gratification in life--if Lady de Brantefield--

"Presently, perhaps--when I ring," said Lady de Brantefield, "and
you, Nancy Fowler, may come back yourself with my treble ruffles: Mrs.
Harrington, I know, will have the goodness to permit. I keep her as much
under my own eye, and suffer her to be as much even in the room with me,
as possible," added Lady de Brantefield, as Nancy left the room; "for
she is a young person quite out of the common line, and her mother
i--but you first recommended her to me, Mrs. Harrington, I remember."

"_The most faithful creature!_" said my mother, in the very tone I had
heard it pronounced twenty years before.

I was carried back so far, so forcibly, and so suddenly, that it was
some time before I could recover myself sufficiently to recollect what
was the order of the day; but no matter--my mother passed on quite
easily to the jewels, and my silence was convenient, and had an air
of perfect deference for Lady de Brantefield's long story of Sir
Josseline's ring, now told over, I believe, for the ninety-ninth time
this season. She ended where she began, with the conviction that, if
the secretary of state would, as he ought, on such an occasion, grant
a general search-warrant, as she was informed had been done for papers,
and things of much less value, her ring would be found in _that_ Jacob's
possession--_that_ Jacob, of whom she had a very bad opinion!

I took the matter up as quietly as was in my nature, and did not begin
with a panegyric on my friend Jacob, but simply asked, what reason her
ladyship had for her very bad opinion of him?

Too good reason, her ladyship emphatically said: she had heard her son,
Lord Mowbray, express a _very_ bad opinion of him.

Lord Mowbray had known this Jacob, she believed, when a boy, and
afterwards when a man at Gibraltar, and had always thought ill of him.
Lord Mowbray had said, that Jacob was avaricious and revengeful; as you
know Jews always are, added her ladyship.

I wondered she had trusted her jewels, then, in such hands.

There, she owned, she had for once been wrong--overruled by others--by
her daughter, Lady Anne, who said the jewels could be more fashionably
set at Manessa's than any where else.

She had never acted against her own judgment in her life, without
repenting of it. Another circumstance, Lady de Brantefield said,
prepossessed her, she owned, against this Jacob; he was from the very
dregs of the people; the son absolutely of an old clothes-man, she
had been informed. What could be expected from such a person, when
temptation came in his way? and could we trust to any thing such a low
sort of person would say?

Lady Anne Mowbray, before I had time to answer, entered dressed for
the ball, with her jewels in full blaze, and for some time there was a
suspension of all hope of coming to any thing like common sense. When
her mother appealed to her about Jacob, Lady Anne protested she took a
horrid dislike to his face the moment she saw him; she thought he had a
shocking Jewish sort of countenance, and she was positive he would swear
falsely, because he was ready to swear that her mamma had the ring on
her finger when she got into the carriage--now Lady Anne was clear she
had not.

"Has your ladyship," I asked, "any particular reason for remembering
this fact?"

"Oh, yes! several very particular reasons."

There is sometimes wisdom in listening to a fool's reasons; for ten to
one that the reasons will prove the contrary to what they are brought
to support, or will at least bring out some fact, the distant bearing of
which on the point of question the fool does not perceive. But when two
fools pour out their reasons at once, it is difficult to profit even
by their folly. The mother's authority at last obtaining precedency,
I heard Lady de Brantefield's cause of belief, first: her ladyship
declared that she never wore Sir Josseline's ring without putting
on after it a _guard ring_, a ring which, being tighter than Sir
Josseline's, kept it safe on her finger. She remembered drawing off the
guard ring when she took off Sir Josseline's, and put that into Jacob's
hands; her ladyship said it was clear to her mind that she could not
have put on Sir Josseline's again, because here was the guard ring on
her _wrong_ finger--a finger on which she never in her life wore it when
she wore Sir Josseline's, for Sir Josseline's was so loose, it would
drop off, unless she had the guard on.

"But was not it possible," I asked, "that your ladyship might this once
have put on Sir Josseline's ring without recollecting the guard?"

No, absolutely impossible: if Jacob and all the Jews upon earth swore
it (who, by-the-bye, would swear any thing), she could not be convinced
against her reason--she knew her own habits--her private reasons to her
were unanswerable.

Lady Anne's private reasons to her were equally unanswerable; but
they were so confused, and delivered with so much volubility, as to be
absolutely unintelligible. All I could gather was, that Fowler and her
daughter Nancy were in the room when Lady Anne and her mother first
missed the ring--that when her mother drew off her glove, and
exclaimed, "Bless me, Sir Josseline's not here!" Lady Anne ran up to
the dressing-table, at which her mother was standing, to try to find the
ring, thinking that her mother might have dropped it in drawing off her
glove; "but it certainly was not drawn off with the glove."

"But might not it be left in the glove?" I asked.

"Oh! dear, no: I shook the glove myself, and Fowler turned every
finger inside out, and Nancy moved every individual box upon the
dressing-table. We were all in such a fuss, because you know mamma's
so particular about Sir Josseline; and to tell you the truth, I was
uncommonly anxious, because I knew if mamma was vexed and lost the
ring, she would not give me a certain diamond cross, that makes me so
particularly remember every circumstance--and I was in such a flurry,
that I know I threw down a bottle of aether that was on mamma's
toilette, on her muff--and it had such a horrid smell!"

The muff! I asked if the muff, as well as the glove, had been searched
carefully.

"La! to be sure--I suppose so--of course it was shaken, as every thing
else in the room was, a hundred times over: the toilette and mamma's
petticoats even, and cloak, and gloves, as I told you."

"Yes, but the muff, did your ladyship examine it yourself?"

"Did I examine it? I don't recollect. No, indeed, after the aether,
how could I touch it? you know: but of course it was shaken, it was
examined, I am sure; but really I know nothing about it--but this, that
it could not possibly be in it, the ring, I mean, because mamma had her
glove on."

I requested permission to see the muff.

"Oh, mamma was forced to give it away because of the horrid smell--she
bid Fowler take it out of the room that minute, and never let it come
near her again; but if you want to see it, ring for Fowler: you can
examine it as much as you please; depend upon it the ring's no more
there than I am--send for Fowler and Nancy, and they can tell you how
we shook every thing to no purpose. The ring's gone, and so am I, for
Colonel Topham's waiting, and I must lead off." And away her ladyship
tripped, flirting her perfumed fan as she went. Persisting in my wish to
see the muff, Lady de Brantefield desired me to ring for Fowler.

Her ladyship wondered, she said, how I could, after the reasons she had
given me for her being morally certain that she had left the ring with
Jacob, and after Lady Anne had justly remarked that the ring could
not get through her glove, entertain a hope of finding it in such a
ridiculous place as a muff. But since I was so possessed with this idea,
the muff should be produced--there was nothing like ocular demonstration
in these cases, except internal conviction: "Did you ring, Mr.
Harrington?"

"I did."

And Miss Nancy with the treble ruffles in her hand now appeared.

"'Tis your mother, child, I want," said Lady de Brantefield.

"Yes, my lady, she is only just finished assisting to lay out the ball
supper."

"But I want her--directly."

"Certainly, my lady, directly."

"And bid her bring--" A whisper from me to my mother, and from my mother
to her ladyship, failed of effect: after turning half round, as if
to ask me what I said--a look which did not pass unnoticed by Miss
Nancy--her ladyship finished her sentence--"And tell Fowler I desire
she will bring me the muff that I gave her last week--the day I lost my
ring."

This message would immediately put Fowler upon her guard, and I was at
first sorry that it had been so worded; but I recollected having heard
an eminent judge, a man of great abilities and experience, say, that if
he were called upon to form a judgment of any character, or to discover
the truth in any case, he would rather that the persons whom he was to
examine were previously put on their guard, than that they were not; for
that he should know, by what they guarded, of what they were afraid.

Fowler appeared--twenty years had so changed her face and figure, that
the sight of her did not immediately shock me as I feared it would. The
daughter, who, I suppose, more nearly resembled what her mother had been
at the time I had known her, was, of the two, the most disagreeable
to my sight and feelings. Fowler's voice was altered by the loss of
a tooth, and it was even by this change less odious to my ear. The
daughter's voice I could scarcely endure. I was somewhat relieved from
the fear of being prejudiced against Fowler by the perception of
this change in her; and while she was paying me her compliments, I
endeavoured to fortify the resolution I had made to judge of her with
perfect impartiality. Her delight at seeing me, however, I could not
believe to be sincere; and the reiterated repetition of her sorrow
for her never having been able to get a sight of me before, I thought
ill-judged: but no matter; many people in her station make these sort
of unmeaning speeches. If I had suffered my imagination to act, I
should have fancied that under a sort of prepared composure there was
constraint and alarm in her look as she spoke to me. I thought she
trembled; but I resolved not to be prejudiced--and this I repeated to
myself many times.

"Well, Fowler, but the muff," said Lady de Brantefield.

"The muff--oh! dear, my lady, I'm so sorry I can't have it for you--it's
not in the house nowhere--I parted with it out of hand directly upon
your saying, my lady, that you desired it might never be suffered to
come nigh your ladyship again. Then, says I to myself, since my lady
can't abide the smell, I can't never wear it, which it would have been
my pride to do; so I thought I could never get it fast enough out of the
house."

"And what did you do with it?"

"I made a present of it, my lady, to poor Mrs. Baxter, John Dutton's
sister, my lady, who was always so much attached to the family, and
would have a regard for even the smallest relic, vestige, or vestment, I
knew, above all things in nature, poor old soul!--she has, what with
the rheumatic pains, and one thing or another, lost the use of her right
arm, so it was particularly agreeable and appropriate--and she kissed
the muff--oh! my lady, I'm sure I only wish your ladyship could have
witnessed the poor soul's veneration."

In reply to a question which made my mother ask about the "poor soul,"
I further learned that Mrs. Baxter was wife to a pawnbroker in
Swallow-street. Fowler added, "If my lady wished any way for the muff, I
can get it to-morrow morning by breakfast, or by the time _you's up_, my
lady."

"Very well, very well, that will do, I suppose, will it not, Mr.
Harrington?"

I bowed, and said not a word more--Fowler, I saw, was glad to get rid of
the subject, and to go on to the treble ruffles, on which while she and
my mother and Lady de Brantefield were descanting, I made my exit, and
went to the ball-room.

I found Lady Anne Mowbray--talked nonsense to her ladyship for a quarter
of an hour--and at last, _ propos _to her perfumed fan, I brought
in the old muff with the horrid smell, on purpose to obtain a full
description of it.

She told me that it was a gray fox-skin, lined with scarlet; that it had
great pompadour-coloured knots at each end, and that it was altogether
hideous. Lady Anne declared that she was heartily glad it would never
shock her eyes more.

It was now just nine o'clock; people then kept better hours than they
do at present; I was afraid that all the shops would be shut; but I
recollected that pawnbrokers' shops were usually kept open late. I lost
no time in pursuing my object.

I took a hackney coach, bribed the coachman to drive very fast to Mr.
Manessa--found Manessa and Jacob going to bed sleepy--but at sight of
me Jacob was alert in an instant, and joyfully ready to go with me
immediately to Baxter, the pawnbroker's.

I made Jacob furnish me with an old surtout and slouched hat, desiring
to look as shabby as possible, that the pawnbroker might take me for one
of his usual nightly customers, and might not be alarmed at the sight of
a gentleman.

"That won't do yet, Mr. Harrington," said Jacob, when I had equipped
myself in the old hat and coat. "Mr. Baxter will see the look of a
gentleman through all that. It is not the shabby coat that will make
the gentleman look shabby, no more than the fine coat can ever make _the
shabby_ look like the gentleman. The pawnbroker, who is used to observe
and find out all manner of people, will know that as well as I--but now
you shall see how well at one stroke I will disguise the gentleman."

Jacob then twisted a dirty silk handkerchief round my throat, and this
did the business so completely, that I defied the pawnbroker and all his
penetration.

We drove as fast as we could to Swallow-street--dismissed our hackney
coach, and walked up to the pawnbroker's.

Light in the shop!--all alive!--and business going on. The shop was so
full of people, that we stood for some minutes unnoticed.

We had leisure to look about us, as we had previously agreed to do, for
Lady De Brantefield's muff.

I had a suspicion that, notwithstanding the veneration with which it had
been said to be treated, it might have come to the common lot of cast
clothes.

Jacob at one side, and I at the other, took a careful survey of the
multifarious contents of the shop; of all that hung from the ceiling;
and all that was piled on the shelves; and all that lay huddled in
corners, or crammed into dark recesses.

In one of the darkest and most ignominious of these, beneath a heap of
sailors' old jackets and trowsers, I espied a knot of pompadour riband.
I hooked it out a little with the stick I had in my hand; but Jacob
stopped me, and called to the shopboy, who now had his eye upon us, and
with him we began to bargain hard for some of the old clothes that lay
upon the muff.

The shopboy lifted them up to display their merits, by the dimness of
the candle-light, and, as he raised them up, there appeared beneath the
gray fox-skin with its scarlet lining and pompadour knots, the Lady de
Brantefield's much venerated muff.

I could scarcely refrain from seizing upon it that moment, but Jacob
again restrained me.

He went on talking about the sailors' jackets, for which we had been in
treaty; and he insisted upon having the old muff into the bargain. It
actually was at last thrown in as a makeweight. Had she been witness to
this bargain, I believe Lady De Brantefield would have dropped down in a
swoon.

The moment I got possession of it, I turned it inside out.--There were
several small rents in the lining--but one in particular had obviously
been cut open with scissars. The shopboy, who thought I was pointing out
the rents to disparage my purchase, assured me that any woman, clever
at her needle, would with half-a-dozen stitches sew all up, and make the
muff as good again as new. Jacob desired the boy to show him some old
seals, rings, and trinkets, fit for a pedlar to carry into the country;
Jacob was, for this purpose, sent to the most respectable place at the
counter, and promoted to the honour of dealing face to face with Mr.
Baxter himself:--drawers, which had before been invisible, were now
produced; and I stood by while Jacob looked over all the new and old
trinkets. I was much surprised by the richness and value of various
brooches, picture settings, watches, and rings, which had come to this
fate: at last, in a drawer with many valuables, which Mr. Baxter told
us that some great man's mistress had, last week, been obliged to leave
with him, Jacob and I, at the same moment, saw "_the splendour of the
topaz_"--Lady de Brantefield's inestimable ring! I must do myself the
justice to say that I behaved incomparably well--did not make a single
exclamation, though I was sure it was the identical ring, the moment I
caught a glimpse of the topaz--and though a glance from Jacob convinced
me I was right. I said I could wait no longer, but would call again for
him in half an hour's time. This was what we had agreed upon beforehand
should be the signal for my summoning a Bow-street officer, whom
Mr. Manessa had in readiness. Jacob identified and swore to the
property--Mr. Baxter was seized. He protested he did not know the ring
was _stolen goods_--he could not recollect who had sold it to him; but
when we mentioned Fowler's name, he grew pale, was disconcerted, and not
knowing how much or how little we knew, decided at once to get out of
the scrape himself by giving her up, and turning evidence against her.
He stated that she had found it in the old muff, but that he never knew
that this muff had belonged to Lady de Brantefield. Mrs. Fowler had
assured Him that it had been left to her along with the wardrobe of a
lady with Whom she had formerly lived.

As soon as Baxter had told all the lies he chose to invent, and
confessed as much of the truth as he thought would serve his purpose,
his deposition was taken and sworn to. This was all that could then be
done, as it was near twelve o'clock.

Poor Jacob's joy at having his innocence proved, and at being relieved
from the fear of injuring the credit of his master's house, raised his
spirits higher than I ever saw them in my life before. But still his joy
and gratitude were more shown by looks than words. He thanked me once,
and but once, warmly and strongly.

"Ah! Mr. Harrington," said he, "from the time you were _Master_
Harrington at school, you were my best friend--always my friend in most
need--I trusted in you, and still I hoped!--hoped that the truth would
stand, and the lie fall. See at last our Hebrew proverb right--'_A lie
has no feet._'"



CHAPTER 18

The next morning, before I left my room to go down to breakfast, my
servant told me that Lady de Brantefield's housekeeper, Mrs. Fowler,
begged to speak to me--she had been come some time. I went into my
mother's dressing-room, where she was waiting alone. I could not bear
to fix my eyes upon her; I advanced towards her, wishing, as I believe I
said aloud, that she had spared me the pain of this interview. I waited
in silence for her to speak, but she did not say a word--I heard the
unhappy woman sobbing violently. Suddenly she took her handkerchief from
before her face, and her sobs ceasing, she exclaimed, "I know you hate
me, Mr. Harrington, and you have reason to hate me--more--much more than
you know of! But Lord Mowbray is the most to blame."

I stood in astonishment. I conceived either that the woman was out
of her senses, or that she had formed the not unprecedented design of
affecting insanity, in hope of escaping the punishment of guilt: she
threw herself at my feet--she would have clasped my knees, but I started
back from her insufferable touch; provoked by this, she exclaimed, in a
threatening tone, "Take care, sir!--The secret is still in my power."

Then observing, I believe, that her threat made no impression, her tone
changed again to the whine of supplication.

"Oh, Mr. Harrington, if I could hope for your forgiveness, I could
reveal such a secret--a secret that so concerns you!"

I retreated, saying that I would not hear any secret from her. But I
stopped, and was fixed to the spot, when she added, under her breath,
the name of Montenero. Then, in a hypocritical voice, she went on--"Oh,
Mr. Harrington!--Oh, sir, I have, been a great sinner! led on--led on
by them that was worse than myself; but if you will plead for me with
my lady, and prevail upon her not to bring me to public shame about this
unfortunate affair of the ring, I will confess all to you--I will throw
myself on your mercy. I will quit the country if you will prevail on my
lady--to let my daughter's marriage go on, and not to turn her out of
favour."

I refused to make any terms; but my mother, whose curiosity could
refrain no longer, burst into the room; and to her Fowler did not plead
in vain. Shocked as she was with the detection of this woman's fraud, my
mother was so eager to learn the secret concerning me, that she promised
to obtain a pardon from Lady de Brantefield for the delinquent, if she
would immediately communicate the secret. I left the room.

I met my father with letters and newspapers in his hand. He looked in
consternation, and beckoned to me to follow him into his own room.

"I was just going in search of you, Harrington," said he: "here's a
devil of a stroke for your mother's friend, Lady de Brantefield."

"The loss of her jewels, do you mean, sir?" said I: "they are found."

"Jewels!" said my father; "I don't know what you are talking of."

"I don't know then what you mean, sir," said I.

"No, to be sure you do not, how could you? for the news is but this
instant come--in this letter which I was carrying to you--which is
addressed to you, as I found, when I got to the middle of it. I beg your
pardon for opening it. Stay, stay--this is not the right letter."

My father seemed much hurried, and looked over his parcel of letters,
while he went on, saying, "This is directed to William Harrington,
instead of William Harrington Harrington. Never mind about that now,
only I don't like to open letters that don't belong to me--here it
is--run your eye over it as fast as you can, and tell me--for I stopped,
as soon as I saw it was not to me--tell me how it is with Mowbray--I
never liked the fellow, nor his mother either; but one can't help
pitying--and being shocked--shocked indeed I was, the moment I read the
letter."

The letter, which appeared to have been written in great perturbation,
and at two or three different times, with different inks, was from a
brother officer of Lord Mowbray's. It began in a tolerably composed
and legible hand, with an account of a duel, in which the writer of the
letter said that he had been second to Lord Mowbray. His lordship
had been wounded, but it was hoped he would do well. Then came the
particulars of the duel, which the second stated, of course, as
advantageously for himself and his principal as he could; but even by
his own statement it appeared that Lord Mowbray had been the aggressor;
that he had been intemperate; and, in short, entirely in the wrong:
the person with whom he fought was a young officer, who had been his
schoolfellow: the dispute had begun about some trivial old school
quarrel, on the most nonsensical subject; something about a Jew boy of
the name of Jacob, and a pencil-case; the young gentleman had appealed
to the evidence of Mr. Harrington, whom he had lately met on a
fishing-party, and who, he said, had a perfect recollection of the
circumstance. Lord Mowbray grew angry; and in the heat of contradiction,
which, as his second said, his lordship could never bear, he gave his
opponent the lie direct. A duel was the necessary consequence. Lord
Mowbray insisted on their firing across the table: his opponent was
compelled to it. They fired, as it was agreed, at the same instant: Lord
Mowbray fell. So far was written while the surgeon was with his patient.
Afterwards, the letter went on in a more confused manner. The surgeon
begged that Lord Mowbray's friends might be informed, to prepare them
for the event; but still there were hopes. Lord Mowbray had begun to
write a letter to Mr. Harrington, but could not go on--had torn it to
bits--and had desired the writer of the present letter to say, "that he
could not go out of the world easy, without his forgiveness--to refer
him to a woman of the name of Fowler, for explanation--a waiting-maid--a
housekeeper now, in his mother's family. Lord Mowbray assured Mr.
Harrington, that he did not mean to have carried the _jest_ (the word
_jest_ scratched out), the thing farther than to show him his power to
break off matters, if he pleased--but he now repented."

This dictated part of the letter was so confused, and so much like the
delirium of a man in a fever, that I should certainly have concluded it
to be without real meaning, had it not coincided with the words which
Fowler had said to me. On turning over the page I saw a postscript--Lord
Mowbray, at two o'clock that morning, had expired. His brother officer
gave no particulars, and expressed little regret, but begged me
to represent the affair properly; and added something about the
lieutenant-colonelcy, which was blotted so much, either purposely or
accidentally, that I could not read it.

My father, who was a truly humane man, was excessively shocked by the
letter; and at first, so much engrossed by the account of the manner of
the young man's death, and by the idea of the shock and distress of
the mother and sister, that he scarcely adverted to the unintelligible
messages to me. He observed, indeed, that the writer of the letter
seemed to be a fool, and to have very little feeling. We agreed that
my mother was the fittest person to break the matter to poor Lady de
Brantefield. If my mother should not feel herself equal to the task, my
father said he would undertake it himself, though he had rather have a
tooth pulled out than go through it.

We went together to my mother. We found her in hysterics, and
Fowler beside her; my mother, the moment she saw us, recovered some
recollection, and pushing Fowler from her with both her hands, she
cried, "Take her away--out of my sight--out of my sight." I took the
hartshorn from Fowler, and bid her leave the room; ordering her, at her
peril, not to leave the house.

"Why did you tell Mrs. Harrington so suddenly, Mrs. Fowler?" my father
began, supposing that my mother's hysterics were the consequence of
having been told, too suddenly, the news of Lord Mowbray's death.

"I did not tell her, sir; I never uttered a sentence of his lordship's
_death_."

In her confusion, the woman betrayed her knowledge of the circumstance,
though on her first speaking to me she had not mentioned it. While I
assisted and soothed my mother, I heard my father questioning her. "She
heard the news that morning, early, in a letter from Lord Mowbray's
gentleman--had not yet had the heart to mention it to her lady--believed
she had given a hint of it to Lady Anne--was indeed so flurried, and
still was so flurried--"

My father, perceiving that Fowler did not know what she was saying,
good-naturedly attributed her confusion to her sorrow for her ladies;
and did not wonder, he said, she was flurried: he was not nervous, but
it had given him a shock. "Sit down, poor Fowler."

The words caught my mother's ear, who had now recovered her recollection
completely; and with an effort, which I had never before seen her make,
to command her own feelings--an effort, for which I thank her, as I knew
it arose from her strong affection for me, she calmly said, "I will
bear that woman--that fiend, in my sight, a few minutes longer, for your
sake, Harrington, till her confession be put in writing and signed: this
will, I suppose, be necessary."

"I desire to know, directly, what all this means?" said my father,
speaking in a certain repressed tone, which we and which Fowler knew to
be the symptom of his being on the point of breaking out into violent
anger.

"Oh! sir," said Fowler, "I have been a very sad sinner; but indeed I
was not so much to blame as them that knew better, and ought to know
better--that bribed and deceived me, and lured me by promises to do
that--to say that--but indeed I was made to believe it was all to end in
no harm--only a jest."

"A jest! Oh, wretch!" cried my mother.

"I was a wretch, indeed, ma'am; but Lord Mowbray was, you'll allow, the
wickedest."

"And at the moment he is dead," said my father, "is this a time--"

Fowler, terrified to her inmost coward soul at the sight of the powerful
indignation which appeared in my father's eyes, made an attempt to throw
herself at his feet, but he caught strong hold of her arm.

"Tell me the plain fact at once, woman."

Now she literally could not speak; she knew my father was violent, and
dreaded lest what she had to say should incense him beyond all bounds.

My mother rose, and said that she would tell the plain fact.

Fowler, still more afraid that my mother should tell it--as she thought,
I suppose, she could soften it best herself--interposed, saying, "Sir,
if you will give me a moment's time for recollection, sir, I will tell
all. Dear sir, if one had committed murder, and was going to be put
to death, one should have that much mercy shown--hard to be condemned
unheard."

My father let go her arm from his strong grasp, and sat down, resolved
to be patient. It was just, he said, that she, that every human creature
should be heard before they were condemned.

When she came to the facts, I was so much interested that I cannot
recollect the exact words in which the account was given; but this was
the substance. Lord Mowbray, when refused by Miss Montenero, had sworn
that he would be revenged on her and on me. Indeed, from our first
acquaintance with her, he had secretly determined to supplant me; and
a circumstance soon occurred which served to suggest the means. He
had once heard Miss Montenero express strongly her terror at seeing an
insane person--her horror at the idea of a marriage which a young friend
of hers had made with a man who was subject to fits of insanity. Upon
this hint Mowbray set to work.

Before he opened his scheme to Fowler, he found how he could bribe her,
as he thought, effectually, and secure her secrecy by making her
an accomplice. Fowler had a mind to marry her daughter to a certain
apothecary, who, though many years older than the girl, and quite old
enough to be her father, was rich, and would raise her to be a lady.
This apothecary lived in a country town near the Priory; the house,
and ground belonging to it, which the apothecary rented, was on her
ladyship's estate, and would be the inheritance of Lord Mowbray. He
promised that he would renew this lease to her future son-in-law,
provided she and the apothecary continued to preserve his good opinion.
His lordship had often questioned Fowler as to the strange nervous fits
I had had when a boy. He had repeated all he had heard reported; and
certainly exaggerated stories in abundance had, at the time, been
circulated. Lord Mowbray affirmed that most people were of opinion it
was _insanity_. Fowler admitted that was always her own opinion--Lord
Mowbray supposed that was the secret reason for her quitting my mother's
service--it certainly was, though she was too delicate, and afraid at
the time, to mention it. By degrees he worked Fowler partly to acquiesce
in all he asserted, and to assert all he insinuated. The apothecary had
been an apprentice to the London apothecary who attended me; he had seen
me often at the time I was at the _worst_; he had heard the reports too,
and he had heard opinions of medical men, and he was brought to assert
whatever his future mother-in-law pleased, for he was much in love with
the young girl. This combination was formed about the period when I
first became attached to Miss Montenero: the last stroke had been given
at the time when Mr. Montenero and Berenice were at General B----'s, in
Surrey. The general's house was within a few miles of the country town
in which the said apothecary lived; it was ten or twelve miles from the
Priory, where Fowler was left, at that time, to take care of the place.
The apothecary usually attended the chief families in the neighbourhood,
and was recommended to General B----'s family. Miss Montenero had a
slight sore throat, and no physician being near, this apothecary was
sent for; he made use of this opportunity, spoke of the friends he had
formerly had in London, in particular of Mr. Harrington's family, for
whom he expressed much gratitude and attachment; inquired anxiously and
mysteriously about young Mr. Harrington's state of health. One day
Miss Montenero and her father called at this apothecary's, to see some
curious things that had been found in a Roman bath, just dug up in the
county of Surrey. Fowler, who had been apprised of the intended
visit, was found in the little parlour behind the shop talking to the
apothecary about poor young Mr. Harrington. While Mr. and Miss Montenero
were looking at the Roman curiosities, Fowler contrived, in half
sentences, to let out what she wished to be overheard about _that_ poor
young gentleman's _strange fits_; and she questioned the apothecary
whether they had come on ever _very_ lately, and hoped that for the
family's sake, as well as his own, it would never break out publicly.
All which observations and questions the apothecary seemed discreetly
and mysteriously to evade answering. Fowler confessed that she could not
get out on this occasion the whole of what she had been instructed to
say, because Miss Montenero grew so pale, they thought she would have
dropped on the floor.

The apothecary pretended to think the young lady had been made sick
by the smell of the shop. It passed off--nothing more was done at that
time. Mr. Montenero, before he left the house, made inquiries who
Fowler was--learned that she had been, for many years, a servant in
the Harrington family,--children's maid. Her evidence, and that of the
apothecary who had attended me in my _extraordinary illness_, agreed;
and there seemed no reason to suspect its truth. Mr. and Miss Montenero
went with a party from General B----'s to see Brantefield Priory. Fowler
attended the company through the house: Mr. Montenero took occasion
to question her most minutely--asked, in particular, about a tapestry
room--a picture of Sir Josseline and the Jew--received such answers as
Lord Mowbray had prepared Fowler to give: so artfully had he managed,
that his interference could not be suspected. Fowler pretended to know
scarcely any thing of her young lord--she had always lived here at the
Priory--his lordship had been abroad--was in the army--always _on the
move_--did not know where he was now--probably in town: her present
ladies had her good word--but her heart, she confessed, was always with
her first mistress, Mrs. Harrington, and poor Master Harrington--_never
to be mentioned without a sigh_--that was noted in her instructions. All
that I or Mowbray had mentioned before Mr. Montenero of my aversion to
Fowler, now appeared to be but the dislike which an insane person is
apt to take against those about them, even to those who treat them
most kindly. Fowler was a good actress, and she was well prompted--she
produced, in her own justification, instructions, in unsigned letters of
Lord Mowbray's. I knew his hand, however disguised. She was directed to
take particular care not to go too far--to let things be _drawn_ from
her--to refuse to give further information lest she should do
mischief. When assured that the Monteneros were friends, then to tell
_circumstances agreed upon_--to end with a promise to produce a _keeper_
who had attended the poor gentleman not long since, who could satisfy
all doubts. Lord Mowbray noted that this must be promised to be done
within the ensuing month--something about a ship's sailing for America
was scratched out in these last instructions.

I have calmly related the facts, but I cannot give an idea of the
transports of passion into which my father burst when he heard them. It
was with the utmost difficulty that we could restrain him till the
woman had finished her confession. Lord Mowbray was dead. His death--his
penitence--pity for his family, quenched my father's rage against
Mowbray; all his fury rose with tenfold violence against Fowler. It
was with the greatest difficulty that I got her out of the room in
safety:--he followed, raging; and my mother, seeing me put Fowler into a
parlour, and turn the key in the door, began beseeching that I would not
keep her another instant in the house. I insisted, however, upon being
permitted to detain her till her confession should be put into writing,
or till Mr. Montenero could hear it from her own lips: I represented
that if once she quitted the house, we might never see her again; she
might make her escape out of town; might, for some new interest, deny
all she had said, and leave me in as great difficulties as ever.

My father, sudden in all his emotions, snatched his hat from the
hall-table, seized his cane, and declared he would that instant go and
settle the point at once with Mr. Montenero and the daughter. My mother
and I, one on each side of him, pleaded that it would be best not to
speak so suddenly as he proposed to do, especially to Berenice. Heaven
bless my mother! she called her _Berenice_: this did not escape my ear.
My father let us take off his hat, and carry away his cane. He sat down
and wrote directly to Mr. Montenero, requesting to see him immediately,
on particular business.

My mother's carriage was at the door; it was by this time the hour for
visiting.

"I will bring Mr. Montenero back with me," said my mother, "for I am
going to pay a visit I should have paid long ago--to Miss Montenero."

I kissed my mother's hand I don't know how many times, till my father
told me I was a _fool_.

"But," turning to me, when the carriage had driven off, "though I
am delighted that the _obstacle_ will be removed on their part, yet
remember, Harrington, I can go no farther--not an inch--not an inch:
sorry for it--but you know all I have said--by Jupiter Ammon, I cannot
eat my own words!"

"But you ought to eat your own words, sir," said I, venturing to jest,
as I knew that I might in his present humour, and while his heart was
warmed; "your words were a libel upon Jews and Jewesses; and the most
appropriate and approved punishment invented for the libeller is--to eat
his own words."



CHAPTER 19

My mother returned almost as quickly as my impatience expected, and from
afar I saw that Mr. Montenero was in the carriage with her. My heart did
certainly beat violently; but I must not stop to describe, if I could,
my various sensations. My mother, telling Mr. Montenero all the time
that she would tell him nothing, had told him every thing that was to
be told: I was glad of it--it spared me the task of detailing Lord
Mowbray's villany. He had once been my friend, or at least I had once
been his--and just after his death it was a painful subject. Besides, on
my own account, I was heartily glad to leave it to my father to complete
what my mother had so well begun.

He spoke with great vehemence. I stood by, proud all the time to show
Mr. Montenero my calmness and self-possession; while Fowler, who
was under salutary terror of my father, repeated, without much
prevarication, all the material parts of her confession, and gave up to
him Lord Mowbray's letters. Astonishment and horror at the discovery
of such villany were Mr. Montenero's first feelings--he looked at Lord
Mowbray's writing again and again, and shuddered in silence, as he cast
his eyes upon Fowler's guilty countenance. We all were glad when she was
dismissed.

Mr. Montenero turned to me, and I saw tears in his eyes.

"There is no obstacle between us now, I hope," said I, eagerly seizing
the hand which he held out to me.

Mr. Montenero pressed me in his arms, with the affection of a parent.

"Heyday! heyday!" said my father, in a tone between pleasure and
anger,--"do you at all know what you are about, Harrington?--remember!"

"Oh! Mr. Montenero," said my mother, "speak, for Heaven's sake, and tell
me that you are perfectly convinced that there was no shadow of truth."

"Nonsense! my dear, I beg your pardon, Mrs. Harrington," said my
father,--"to be sure he is convinced, he is not an idiot--all my
astonishment is, how he could ever be made to believe such a thing!"

Mr. Montenero answered my mother and my father alternately, assuring my
mother that he was quite convinced, and agreeing with my father that he
had been strangely imposed upon. He turned again to me, and I believe at
the same instant the same recollections occurred to us both--new light
seemed to break upon us, and we saw in a different point of view a
variety of past circumstances. Almost from the moment of my acquaintance
with Berenice, I could trace Lord Mowbray's artifices. Even from the
time of our first going out together at Westminster Abbey, when Mr.
Montenero said he loved enthusiasm, how Mowbray encouraged, excited me
to follow that line. At the Tower, my kneeling in raptures to the figure
of the Black Prince--my exaggerated expressions of enthusiasm--my poetic
and dramatic declamation and gesture--my start of horror at Mowbray's
allusion to the _tapestry-chamber_ and the picture of Sir Josseline--my
horror afterwards at the auction, where Mowbray had prepared for me the
sight of the picture of the Dentition of the Jew--and the appearance of
the figure with the terrible eyes at the synagogue; all, I now found,
had been contrived or promoted by Lord Mowbray: Fowler had dressed up
the figure for the purpose. They had taken the utmost pains to work
on my imagination on this particular point, on which he knew my early
associations might betray me to symptoms of apparent insanity. Upon
comparing and explaining these circumstances, Mr. Montenero further laid
open to me the treacherous ingenuity of the man who had so duped me by
the show of sympathy and friendship. By dexterous insinuations he
had first excited curiosity--then suggested suspicions, worked every
accidental circumstance to his purpose, and at last, rendered desperate
by despair, and determined that I should not win the prize which he
had been compelled to resign, had employed so boldly his means and
accomplices, that he was dreadfully near effecting my ruin.

While Mr. Montenero and I ran over all these circumstances,
understanding each other perfectly, but scarcely intelligible to
either my father or mother, they looked at us both with impatience and
surprise, and rejoiced when we had finished our explanations--and yet,
when we had finished, an embarrassing minute of silence ensued.

My mother broke it, by saying something about Miss Montenero. I do not
know what--nor did she. My father stood with a sort of bravadoing look
of firmness, fixing himself opposite to me, as though he were repeating
to himself, "If, sir!--If--By Jupiter Ammon! I must be consistent."

Mr. Montenero appeared determined not to say any more, but something
seemed to be still in reserve in his mind.

"I hope, Mr. Montenero," said I, "that now no obstacle exists."

"On my part none," replied Mr. Montenero; "but you recollect--"

"I recollect only your own words, my dear sir," cried I. "'either my
daughter and you must never meet again, or must meet to part no more'--I
claim your promise."

"At all hazards?" said Mr. Montenero.

"No hazards with such a woman as Berenice," said I, "though her
religion--"

"I would give," exclaimed my father, "I would give one of my fingers
this instant, that she was not a Jewess!"

"Is your objection, sir, to her not being a Christian, or to her being
the daughter of a Jew?"

"Can you conceive, Mr. Montenero," cried my father, "that after all I
have seen of you--all you have done for me--can you conceive me to be
such an obstinately prejudiced brute? My prejudices against the Jews I
give up--you have conquered them--all, all. But a difference of religion
between man and wife--"

"Is a very serious objection indeed," said Mr. Montenero; "but if that
be the only objection left in your mind, I have the pleasure to tell
you, Mr. Harrington," addressing himself to me, "that your love and duty
are not at variance: I have tried you to the utmost, and am satisfied
both of the steadiness of your principles and of the strength of your
attachment to my daughter--Berenice is not a Jewess."

"Not a Jewess!" cried my father, starting from his seat: "Not a Jewess!
Then my Jupiter Ammon may go to the devil! Not a Jewess!--give you joy,
Harrington, my boy!--give me joy, my dear Mrs. Harrington--give me
joy, excellent--(_Jew_, he was on the point of saying) excellent Mr.
Montenero; but, is not she your daughter?"

"She is, I hope and believe, my daughter," said Mr. Montenero smiling;
"but her mother was a Christian; and according to my promise to
Mrs. Montenero, Berenice has been bred in her faith--a Christian--a
Protestant."

"A Christian! a Protestant!" repeated my father.

"An English Protestant: her mother was daughter of--"

"An English Protestant!" interrupted my father, "English! English! Do
you hear that, Mrs. Harrington?"

"Thank Heaven! I do hear it, my dear," said my mother. "But, Mr.
Montenero, we interrupt--daughter of--?"

"Daughter of an English gentleman, of good family, who accompanied one
of your ambassadors to Spain."

"Of good family, Mr. Harrington," said my mother, raising her head
proudly as she looked at me with a radiant countenance: "I knew she
was of a good family from the first moment I saw her at the play--so
different from the people she was with--even Lady de Brantefield asked
who she was. From the first moment I thought--"

"You thought, Mrs. Harrington," interposed my father, "you thought, to
be sure, that Miss Montenero _looked like a Christian_. Yes, yes; and no
doubt you had _presentiments_ plenty."

"Granted, granted, my dear; but don't let us say any more about them
now."

"Well, my boy! well, Harrington! not a word?"

"No--I am too happy!--the delight I feel--But, my dear Mr. Montenero,"
said I, "why--_why_ did not you tell all this sooner? What pain you
would have spared me!"

"Had I spared you the pain, you would never have enjoyed the delight;
had I spared you the trial, you would never have had the triumph--the
triumph, did I say? Better than all triumph, this sober certainty of
your own integrity. If, like Lord Mowbray--but peace be to the dead! and
forgiveness to his faults. My daughter was determined never to marry any
man who could be induced to sacrifice religion and principle to interest
or to passion. She was equally determined never to marry any man whose
want of the spirit of toleration, whose prejudices against the
Jews, might interfere with the filial affection she feels for her
father--though he be a Jew."

"_Though_"--Gratitude, joy, love, so overwhelmed me at this moment, that
I could not say another syllable; but it was enough for Mr. Montenero,
deeply read as he was in the human heart.

"Why did not I spare you the pain?" repeated he. "And do you think that
the trial cost _me_, cost _us_ no pain?" said Mr. Montenero. "The time
may come when, as my son, you may perhaps learn from Berenice--"

"The time is come!--this moment!" cried my father; "for you see the poor
fellow is burning with impatience--he would not be my son if he were
not."

"That is true, indeed!" said my mother.

"True--very likely," said Mr. Montenero, calmly holding me fast. "But,
impetuous sir, recollect that once before you were too sudden for
Berenice: after you had saved my life, you rushed in with the joyful
news, and--"

"Oh! no rushing, for mercy's sake, Harrington!" said my mother: "some
consideration for Miss Montenero's nerves!"

"Nerves! nonsense, my dear," said my father: "what woman's nerves were
ever the worse for seeing her lover at her feet? I move--and I am sure
of one honourable gentleman to second my motion--I move that we all
adjourn, forthwith, to Mr. Montenero's."

"This evening, perhaps, Miss Montenero would allow us," said my mother.

"This instant," said Mr. Montenero, "if you will do me the honour, Mrs.
Harrington."

"The carriage," said my mother, ringing.

"The carriage, directly," cried my father to the servant as he entered.

"Here's a fellow will certainly fly the moment you let him go," said my
father.

And away I flew, with such swiftness, that at the foot of the stairs I
almost fell over Jacob. He, not knowing any thing of what had happened
this morning, full of the events of the preceding night, and expecting
to find me the same, began to say something about a ring which he held
in his hand.

"That's all settled--all over--let me pass, good Jacob."

Still he endeavoured to stop me. I was not pleased with this
interruption. But there was something so beseeching and so kind in
Jacob's manner that I could not help attending to him. Had the poor
fellow known the cause of my impatience, he would not certainly have
detained me. He begged me, with some hesitation, to accept of a ring,
which Mr. Manessa his partner and he took the liberty of offering me as
a token of their gratitude. It was not of any great value, but it was
finished by an artist who was supposed to be one of the best in the
world.

"Willingly, Jacob," said I; "and it comes at the happiest moment--if you
will allow me to present it, to offer it to a lady, who--"

"Who will, I hope," said my father, appearing at the top of the stairs,
"soon be his bride."

"His bride!"

Jacob saw Mr. Montenero's face behind me, and clasping his, hands, "The
very thing I wished!" cried he, opening the house-door.

"Follow us, Jacob," I heard Mr. Montenero say, as we stepped into the
carriage; "follow us to the house of joy, you who never deserted the
house of mourning."

The ring, the history of it, and the offering it to Berenice, prepared
my way in the happiest manner, and prevented the danger, which Mr.
Montenero feared, of my own or my father's precipitation. We told her in
general the circumstances that had happened, but spared her the detail.

"And now, my beloved daughter," said Mr. Montenero, "I may express to
you all the esteem, all the affection, all the fulness of approbation I
feel for _your choice_."

"And I, Miss Montenero!--Let me speak, pray, Mrs. Harrington," said my
father.

"By and by," whispered my mother; "not yet, my love."

"Ay, put the ring on her finger--that's right, boy!" cried my father, as
my mother drew him back.

Berenice accepted of the ring in the most gracious, the most graceful
manner.

"I accept this with pleasure," said she; "I shall prize it more than
ever Lady de Brantefield valued her ring: as a token of goodness and
gratitude, it will be more precious to me than any jewel could be; and
it will ever be dear to me," added she, with a softened voice, turning
to her father, "very dear, as a memorial of the circumstances which have
removed the only obstacle to _our_ happiness."

"Our," repeated my father: "noble girl! Above all affectation. Boy, a
truce with your transports! She is my own daughter--I must have a kiss."

"For shame, my dear," said my mother; "you make Miss Montenero blush!"

"Blushes are very becoming--I always thought yours so, Mrs.
Harrington--that's the reason I have given you occasion to blush for
me so often. Now you may take me out of the room, madam. I have some
discretion, though you think you have it all to yourself," said my
father.

I have some discretion, too, hereditary or acquired. I am aware that
the moment two lovers cease to be miserable, they begin to be tiresome;
their best friends and the generous public are satisfied to hear as
little as possible concerning their prosperous loves.

It was otherwise, they say, in the days of Theagenes and Chariclea.

"How! will you never be satisfied with hearing?" says their historian,
who, when he came to a prosperous epoch in their history, seems to have
had a discreet suspicion that he might be too long; "Is not my discourse
yet tedious?"

"No," the indefatigable auditor is made to reply; "and who is he, unless
he have a heart of adamant or iron, that would not listen content to
hear the loves of Theagenes and Chariclea, though the story should last
a year? Therefore, continue it, I beseech you."

"Continue, I beseech you:" dear flattering words! Though perhaps no one,
at this minute, says or feels this, I must add a few lines more--not
about myself, but about Mr. Montenero.

In the moment of joy, when the heart opens, you can see to the very
bottom of it; and whether selfish or generous, revengeful or forgiving,
the real disposition is revealed. We were all full of joy and
congratulations, when Mr. Montenero, at the first pause of silence,
addressed himself in his most persuasive tone to me.

"Mr. Harrington--good Mr. Harrington--I have a favour to ask from you."

"A favour! from me! Oh! name it," cried I: "What pleasure I shall have
in granting it!"

"Perhaps not. You will not have pleasure--immediate pleasure--in
granting it: it will cost you present pain."

"Pain!--impossible! but no matter how much pain if you desire it. What
can it be?"

"That wretched woman--Fowler!"

I shuddered and started back.

"Yes, Fowler--your imagination revolts at the sound of her name--she
is abhorrent to your strongest, your earliest, associations; but, Mr.
Harrington, you have given proofs that your matured reason and your
humanity have been able to control and master your imagination and your
antipathies. To this power over yourself you owe many of your virtues,
and all the strength of character, and, I will say it, the sanity of
mind, my son, without which Berenice--"

"I will see--I will hear Fowler this instant," cried I. "So far I will
conquer myself; but you will allow that this is a just antipathy. Surely
I have reason to hate her."

"She is guilty, but penitent; she suffers and must suffer. Her mistress
refuses ever to see her more. She is abandoned by all her family, all
her friends; she must quit her country--sails to-morrow in the vessel
which was to have taken us to America--and carries with her, in her
own feelings, her worst punishment--a punishment which it is not in our
power to remit, but it is in our power to mitigate her sufferings--I can
provide her with an asylum for the remainder of her miserable old age;
and you, my son, before she goes from happy England, see her and forgive
her. 'It is the glory of a man to pass by an offence.' Let us see and
forgive this woman. How can we better celebrate our joy--how can we
better fill the measure of our happiness, than by the forgiveness of our
enemies?"

"By Jupiter Ammon," cried my father, "none but a good Christian could do
this!"

"And why," said Berenice, laying her hand gently on my father's arm,
"and why not a good Jew?"

END OF HARRINGTON.

